   
               Introduction to GEM(TM) Programming 
                           for GEM DOS

                       (revised 11/21/85)



Copyright   (C)   1985  Digital  Research   Inc.     All   rights 
reserved.    Digital  Research  and  its  logo   are   registered  
trademarks  of  Digital  Research  Inc. DRI,  GEM,  GEM  Desktop,  
Graphics   Environment   Manager,   LINK68,   and   SID-68K   are 
trademarks    of   Digital   Research  Inc.    CompuServe  is   a 
registered trademark of CompuServe,  Inc.  ATARI, TOS,  520ST and 
ST are trademarks of ATARI Corporation.  ALCYON is a trademark of 
Alcyon.  IBM PC is a registered trademark of IBM Corporation.



    PLEASE  REVIEW  THIS DOCUMENT BEFORE PROCEEDING WITH THE  
                 GEM(TM) DOS 68K Developer Kit.  



INTRODUCTION

Welcome  to "Introduction to GEM Programming."    We  hope   this  
document   will  answer  many of your initial  questions.   Check 
your disks for a README.DOC file which contains more information.  
There  may   be   future  changes  in  both   the  software   and  
documentation.     You  can  find  notice of these changes on the 
DRI(TM)   SIG   that  the  DRI  Support   Center   maintains   on 
CompuServe(R).

This document contains three sections:

   - Part 1: GETTING STARTED

   - Part 2: GEM RESOURCE CONSTRUCTION SET

   - Part 3: ADDITIONAL REFERENCE MATERIAL  



                     Part 1: GETTING STARTED



INTRODUCTION

This part of "Introduction to GEM Programming for GEM DOS"  gives 
an   overview   of   the   GEM software  and refers  you  to  the 
appropriate areas of the documentation provided with the GEM  DOS 
68K  Developer Kit.   It also tells you how  to  use  the  sample 
programs,  tools, and utilities.  In addition, it suggests how to 
optimize your code and prepare for other environments.  At DRI we 
are  very  excited  about  the  power  GEM  software  gives   the  
applications programmer  and we want to provide the most complete 
set of tools and support available.  


Section 1:

GEM DOS 68K Developer Kit



GEM DOS 68K Developer Kit COMPONENTS

The  GEM  DOS 68K Developer Kit is the set  of  Digital  Research 
tools and utilities that enables an application program developer 
to use  the  GEM  Virtual  Device Interface  (VDI)  and  the  GEM  
Application    Environment  Services  (AES).    This  toolkit  is 
designed  for use under TOS(TM),  version 1.1 or higher   on   an  
ATARI  ST(TM)  with  a  1/2MB  or  more  of  memory(see "Hardware 
Requirements"), but any applications written with it may be moved 
from environment to environment with a minimal amount of effort.




GEM DOS 68K Developers Kit DOCUMENTATION


Documents  provided with the GEM DOS Developer Kit,  DRI  product  
code  number 1063, include the following:

   - GEM Programmer's Guide, Volume 1: VDI

   - GEM Programmer's Guide, Volume 1 Release Notes

   - GEM Programmer's Guide, Volume 2: AES

   - GEM DOS Programmer's Reference Guide

   - GEM DOS User's Guide

   - KERMIT User's Guide

   - GEM DOS Supplement to the KERMIT User's Guide

   - C Language Programming Guide for CP/M-68K

   - C Language Programming Guide for GEM DOS

   - End User Program License Agreement

   - cover letter and supplemental notices

   - several  documentation files on disk including "Introduction 
          to GEM Programming for GEM DOS"(this document) 



SOFTWARE INSTALLATION PROCEDURE

The   software  provided as a part of the Developer Kit  consists  
of  six  disks,  including  source  code  for  DEMO,  the  sample 
application,  HELLO,  the sample accessory, and XFORM, an example 
of transform form.



To install the software on your ATARI ST,  perform the  following 
operations:

   1. Load  TOS  into your computer if you are not using a  ROMed       
      version.

   2. Place disk labeled TOOLS #2 into drive  A,  close the drive 
      door and double-click on the DRIVE A icon. 

   3. Install  A:COMMAND.PRG  as TOS  takes  parameters,  with  a 
      document type of BAT.

   4. Double-click on A:INSTALL.BAT.  At this time the files from 
      this  disk will be copied to your hard disk  automatically.  
      When finished, you will be prompted to insert another disk.  
      You  may  insert ANY of the remaining disks until you  have 
      copied  each of the six disks.   BE SURE TO INSERT EACH  OF 
      THE  SIX DISKS.   The INSTALL program will not know if  you 
      insert  one of the disks a second time and will assume that 
      all is correct after the sixth disk.



                               End of Section 1

Section 2:

DEVELOPMENT ENVIRONMENT



HARDWARE REQUIREMENTS

The  recommended  hardware  for the GEM  DOS  68K  Developer  Kit  
(1063)   is   an  ATARI ST with 1/2MB or more of  RAM,  a  floppy 
disk drive, an ATARI hard disk drive, monitor and a mouse.
     



SOFTWARE REQUIREMENTS

In  addition  to  the GEM DOS Developer Kit,  you need  only  the 
following software:

   - TOS version 1.1 or higher



OVERVIEW OF GEM SYSTEM SOFTWARE

On  the  ATARI,  GEM  is an integral part of  the  TOS  operating 
system. In loading TOS the AES and VDI become resident in memory.
On  ROM based ATARI machines portions of the VDI,  including  the 
device drivers and fonts, are loaded into RAM.  

GEM   software   provides   a  unique  graphics  environment  for 
personal  computers,  allowing users to work more effectively  by 
manipulating graphic images such  as icons,  drop-down menus, and 
windows.

The  GEM VDI supports graphics call portability  across  physical 
hardware  such  as graphics screens,  and peripheral  input   and  
output   devices.     The   GEM  AES supplements  the   GEM   VDI  
graphics   I/O   calls  with  functions  that   manage  graphics-
based  user input to application  environment  metaphors.   These  
include  icons,  drop-down  menus,  forms,  and  user-manipulated 
menus.


GEM VIRTUAL DEVICE INTERFACE (VDI)

The   GEM   VDI  creates graphics on an output device such  as  a 
screen or printer.   It consists of two main  components:     the  
Graphics   Device   Operating   System (GDOS)  and   the   device  
driver  (including  font information).   If you are working on  a 
system  where  TOS  is not in ROM then TOS  itself  will  require 
approximately 192K of ROM including the Desktop.   Any "loadable" 
device drivers or fonts will require additional memory.  A device 
driver is approximately 35-40K,  a font for the monochrome screen 
varies  from  less than 10K to more than 20K depending  upon  the 
size of the font.   With a ROMed version of TOS the only overhead 
will  be  for the device driver and  fonts.   

The  device driver contains much of the output functionality  and 
the size can  vary  from  device  to  device  depending  on  what  
functions  have  been implemented.    Because  the  functionality  
is   located  in a loadable piece of  executable  code,  programs 
written  to  GEM are portable.   The programmer merely talks   to  
all   devices  as though  they were one and the same and data  is 
returned from these devices that will indicate to the  programmer 
the   limitations  of  that  particular  device.     It  is   the  
responsiblity  of the application to interpret  this  data.   For 
example,  one  of these limitations is the aspect ratio  returned 
when a  program  performs an  "Open  Workstation".     (See  your 
GEM Programmers Guide,  Volume 1: VDI for information on the Open 
Workstation call.)   After  the  aspect  ratio  of  the device is 
returned,  the programmer must use this information to modify the 
data  sent to the device so that it looks the same on any  device 
regardless  of aspect ratio.     Through   careful,  non-machine-
specific programming, you can write one program that you can port 
to other systems quite easily.



NDC VS. RC COORDINATE SYSTEM

The   GEM   VDI  supports  two  coordinate  systems    for    the  
description  of  graphic space:  the Normalized Device Coordinate 
(NDC)  system  and the Raster Coordinate (RC)  system.   The  NDC 
system  addresses the graphics display independent of  the device  
coordinate   size  while  the  RC  system addresses the device in 
actual  device  units.   These systems are descibed in detail  in 
Section  1  of  the  GEM Programmer's Guide, Volume 1: VDI.

NOTE:    In  order to make full use of the raster type operations 
available, WE SUGGEST THAT YOU USE THE RASTER COORDINATE SYSTEM.



RASTER TEXT FONTS

When loaded, the device driver contains one or more system fonts.    
Additional   fonts    are   loaded   when   requested    by   the 
application,  using  the "Load Fonts" call.   The fonts that  are 
loaded  are  associated  with  the  device  driver  as  specified  
in  the ASSIGN.SYS file.   See Appendix G of the GEM Programmer's 
Guide, Volume 1: VDI for more information on fonts.

When  using fonts,  you can choose one of two  different   modes:  
Point  mode  and Absolute  mode.     Point  mode supports text of 
two sizes,  1x and 2x.  Absolute mode provides for the scaling of 
text  at  any  value between 0  and  2x.     These  modes  are  a 
function  of the device driver.   We have placed the capabilities 
for  both  modes into our screen drivers.   The  printer  drivers  
supplied  by  Digital Research support both modes but round  down 
to the nearest size.

One   special  consideration when displaying text within the work 
area of a window is that it may be necessary for your application 
to   determine  how  much  text will  fit  into  your  window  if 
you  are  going to allow the length of character  strings  to  be 
changed.  (For example, you can send an English  language  string 
to  a window for one version of a product and switch to a  French 
language  string  for  another,  but  the length  of  the  string 
required  to  convey the same  idea  in French  is   longer   and 
requires  the  placement  of text into a different  area  of  the 
window.)  In order to facilitate these types of requirements  DRI 
has included a  set of VDI calls specifically for inquiring about 
the  text  attributes.   (See Section 8 of the  GEM  Programmer's 
Guide, Volume 1:  VDI.)    To  determine  the amount of text that 
will fit within a window,  you perform an "Inquire Character Cell 
Width" and use that value in conjunction with  the  size  of  the  
window,  returned   by performing a WIND_GET on the work area  of 
the  window.   This  is  also the way that you can  control  text 
spacing in your application.   This is not a problem with   alert  
boxes    or   dialog   boxes   since   the   string   length   is 
determined when they are designed with the Resource  Construction 
Set.

For   complete  information on TEXT functionality,  consult  your 
GEM Programmer's Guide, Volume 1: VDI.



GEM METAFILE

The  GEM  metafile is a standard format file used by GEM to  send 
information to other applications and peripheral devices.  It  is 
constructed of object-oriented inscriptions of pictures from  GEM  
applications   or   bit-image  files  from  paint  programs   and 
digitizers.   When  constructing a GEM metafile,  be sure you  do 
both of the following:

   1. Define the physical page size of the area to be output.

   2. Define the coordinate system you are using.

Additional  information  on  the GEM metafile  can  be  found  in 
Appendix  C  of  the GEM Programmer's Guide,  Volume 1:  VDI,  in 
the "Additional Documentation" section (3) of this document or in 
the additional files available in the DR FORUM on CompuServe.



GEM APPLICATION ENVIRONMENT SERVICES (AES)

The  Application  Environment Services (AES) consists of  several 
primary  elements including the Subroutine libraries,  the Screen 
Manager,   and  the  Dispatcher.     The  Subroutine    libraries  
provides   for   windowing,    management   of   objects,   mouse 
movement,  and  more.    This includes the Object  Library,  Form 
Library,  Event Library and more.   (For  more  information,  see  
Section  1.5  of  the  GEM Programmer's Guide, Volume 2: AES.)

The   Screen  Manager is responsible for the mouse whenever it is 
outside of the application window.  It also sends messages to the  
application such as a "redraw" message.

The   Dispatcher   is   the  core of  the  limited  multi-tasking 
capabilities  of  GEM software.   It sets up a  "ready  list"  to 
rotate  processor   time  among   multiple  processes,   rotating  
control  only when the application is making a system call to the 
AES.

Although  the  present  development system  is  a  single-tasking 
system,  if your application can function properly alongside  the 
desk  accessories  then you are ready for a future  multi-tasking 
environment.




MEMORY MANAGEMENT


For effective memory management a programmer need concern himself 
with only two procedures:

   1. You   must   link   one  of  the  three  memory  management 
      routines  to your  application at link time.   This routine 
      determines    the    amount   of   memory     that     your  
      application  requires,  shrinking  the  memory allocated at 
      execution time to that amount.
      
      Note:   The three routines are APPSTART.C, ACCSTART.C, and 
      PROSTART.C.   The  file that you use for memory  management 
      depends  upon whether you are writing an application or  an 
      accessory.

   2. If you need temporary memory, you should use  the  standard  
      calls for memory allocation and memory release.




                               End of Section 2



Section 3:


SAMPLE GEM APPLICATIONS AND GEM DESK ACCESSORY



DEMO: A SAMPLE GEM APPLICATION

The  sample  application,  DEMO,  provided  with  the   GEM   DOS 
Developer Kit serves  as  an  example  way  of  how  you  program 
to   the   GEM  environment.    It  demonstrates  the   following 
functionality and more:

   - opening and closing of windows

   - moving of windows

   - use of alert boxes and dialog boxes

   - drop-down menus

   - error handling

   - transforming forms

   - user-defined objects

   - scrolling selector


There are BATch files for each sample containing the compile  and 
link   options   to   simplify   your   understanding   of    the 
techniques involved in developing a GEM application or accessory. 
For   moreinformation  on  which BAT file you might want to  use, 
see  the  list of files contained in FILES.DOC in your  Developer 
Kit.



HELLO: A SAMPLE GEM DESK ACCESSORY

Since  you  cannot  execute an accessory,  you must compile it as 
an  application for debugging purposes.   In the sample accessory 
we show  you  a  technique  to use.     On  the  sample  programs  
disk  there  are  two  files, DESKACC0.H and DESKACC1.H, that you 
use  for  this  purpose.   Copy DESKAPP0.H   to   DESKACC.H   and 
compile  to  create an application.   When you are finished  with 
the development and debugging of your accessory,  copy DESKAPP1.H 
to  DESKACC.H  and  recompile, creating an accessory.

To  load  an accessory,  it must have a filetype of .ACC  and  be 
loacated in the AUTO subdirectory of our BOOT disk. 



Note:     There  are  two  files  on  the  disk,  TGEMBIND.C  and 
TVDIBIND.C,  used by the accessory.  They demonstrate a technique 
for reducing the  amount  of  code  in your  accessory.  They are 
used in the HELLOMAC.BAT file.  They demonstrate how the code for 
the  calls  that the accessory is not using can be stripped   out  
to  reduce  overhead.     You  can  do  the  same  by creating  a 
library  file  of the bindings using the librarian supplied  with 
the Developer Kit. 



LIST OF FILES ON GEM SAMPLE APPLICATION SOURCE DISK 

For  a complete description of the disks and the files that  they 
contain see the file FILES.DOC on the documentation disk.




                               End of Section 3



Section 4:


PORTING TO OTHER ENVIRONMENTS


A  program  written  to GEM system software is  portable  to  any  
machine   with  the same  processor that can run GEM without  any 
modification.   It is also possible to move an application to  an 
environment  with  a different processor running GEM  with  minor 
modifications.

With  our sample application we have included all of the machine- 
and  operating system-specific calls into several include  files.  
Most of the work  in  moving an  application to another processor 
requires  merely replacing these files with the ones required for 
your  new  environment,   then  recompiling  and  linking.     An 
exception   to   this is that the icons must be remade  for  each 
system  that  has  resolution with a different  height  to  width 
ratio.

As GEM becomes available on other systems,  Digital Research will 
make available the necessary files for making the changeover.  We 
strongly  advise  you  to write machine-independent  code  or  to 
include  all  machine-dependent  code  into   modules  that   are  
simply  identified  and replaced.   We have already moved many of 
our  applications to a new environment with a minimum  of  effort 
and expect that  you will be able to do likewise.



NOTES ON CONVERSION FROM INTEL GEM to 68K GEM

The  following  cautionary  notes  are based  on  my  experiences 
porting  the Resource Construction Set and Doodle to the GEM  68K 
environment from the IBM PC.   While these hints are in many ways 
a  confession of my own bad C habits,  they may save you some  of 
the hours of frustration which I went through.   They are loosely 
organized by category,  but it would be a good idea to read  them 
all before beginning - they are easier to prevent than fix.  

One  note:  if you have a Unix development system  available,  it 
would  be profitable to establish a set of source files on it  so 
that you can use lint and grep to assist in tracking down problem 
areas.


I.  Portable C conventions


1.    The  best  medicine  is  prevention:    Read  and  use  the 
portability conventions in PORTAB.H and MACHINE.H.

2.   Be careful to use NULLPTR when you are clearing a pointer or 
passing a pointer argument, it is not the same as NULL!

3.   Never make assumptions about the size of pointers!   This is 
especially  insidious if you create some general usage UWORDs and 
coerce pointers into them.   Lint will not flag this if you  type 
cast correctly, and you will pay dearly later.

4.   Be  especially  careful of parameter mismatches  flagged  by 
lint.   An easy habit to fall into is to pass UWORDs for pointers 
and vice-versa.  As in #3, you will pay for this!

5.   Do  not make assumptions on the order of bytes within words, 
or words within longs.  Use the portability macros when accessing 
subfields.

6.   Make sure the last entry in a switch statement is not empty.  
Lattice  will accept this omission (interpreting it as a  break), 
but it confuses lint tremendously.

7.  If you are being tricky with stack manipulations, e.g., using 
variable  parameter  procedures,  be  very  careful  to  use  the 
sizeof() conventions as you increment your pointers!



II.  Problems with Alcyon C for 68K


1.   Alcyon labels have only seven significant characters,  while 
Lattice processes eight.  Beware of collisions!

2.  Unsigned bytes are not supported by Alcyon.

3.   When casting a BYTE to a WORD,  or a WORD to a LONG,  Alcyon 
will sign extend.   If this is not what you want, follow the cast 
with  a  mask if the circumstances may cause the high-bit  to  be 
set.

4.   Arrays of UWORDs will erroneously generate alignment errors.  
While unsightly, these may be safely ignored.

5.   Alcyon  will not process #include correctly when it  appears 
after  data  is defined.   An immediate implication is  that  the 
resource header information in RSCREATE must be manually inserted 
into  the  C  image of the  resource.   Note  that  the  variable 
beg_file  must be typed LONG in the 68K version,  or offsets will 
be incorrectly computed.

6.   Do not assume that static and automatic variables which  are 
declared together will be loaded together!   In general, they are 
loaded  in the order in which they are >referenced<.   This  will 
cause  problems  if you have assumed (for example)  that  certain 
buffers  are contiguous,  or that a declaration of WORD  x,y,w,h; 
may be used as a GRECT structure.

7.   Alcyon  stores all string data (the actual ASCII) at the end 
of  a  data segment,  while Lattice does this as soon  as  it  is 
defined.

8.   Field  names within structures collide between structures!!!  
This is different from K&R standard C.   For example, if you have 
a structure 'foo' with field BYTE *name; and later on a different 
structure 'bar' with field LONG name;  the second definition will 
replace the first, >without warning<!!!

9.  Alcyon generates references for all EXTERNs declared, whether 
you  actually use them or not.   And no,  the linker isn't  smart 
enough to skip them; so don't do that.

10.   For  those of you using floating point,  be aware that  the 
Alcyon run-time differs from Lattice.   Lattice supports both 32-
bit and 64-bit IEEE standard formats; Alcyon supports 32-bit IEEE 
or Motorola formats.  (All of Alcyon's floating point I/O is done 
in Motorola, so you don't really gain any precision with the IEEE 
package.)



III.  And a 68K hardware concern


1.   Remember  that  LONGs have to be word aligned  in  68K-land.  
This  could  cause  some  grief if you have  a  piece  of  memory 
management code which you are moving from the Intel.


IV.  Gem Dos Glitches


There  are  a few things that you should be aware of  when  using 
COMMAND.PRG including:

     -  There is no support for conditional commands!
     -  You may not use device names in place of file names!
    
Note:   See the additional notes on COMMAND.PRG in the README.DOC 
        file.



V.  Binding issues and bugs


1.   Be  aware  that the include files vary from  environment  to 
environment.    If   you  are  moving  an  application  from  one 
environment to another be sure to update all .H files.

2.   Error codes are not correctly posted in the GEM DOS binding.  
So,  for  example,  you may open a non-existent file and  not  be 
warned.    Attempting a read on the invalid file handle will then 
crash the system.

3.  The _UMUL_DIV entry is not correctly defined in vdibind.a






                               End of Section 4




Section 5:


CONSTRUCTING A GEM APPLICATION



When  designing a GEM application program,  you first create  the 
menus  and dialog boxes using the GEM Resource Construction  Set.  
(See Part 2 of this  document.)  If you will be using ICONS  then 
you  must  move them over from the INTEL world since there is  no 
68K  ICON  editor at this time.   After you have  completed  this 
step, you can develop the code that will use  the resource file.

When  developing  ICONS  on the IBM personal  computer  that  you 
intend  to  move to the ATARI ST be sure to use the correct  ICON 
SIZE.


The following table lists common screen resolutions for the ATARI 
and  the  recommended  icon size for each.



                  Common Screen Resolutions and
                     Recommended Icon Sizes

        --------------------------------------------------
                 Resolution        Recommended Icon Size
        --------------------------------------------------
                 320 x 200               32 x 32
                 640 x 200               48 x 24
                 640 x 400               32 x 32
        --------------------------------------------------


You may need to use the SIZE ICON command to change your ICON  to 
the proper resolution.   See the documentation provided with your 
GEM 8086 Developer Kit.


 
To  write  a  GEM  application program,  we recommend you  create 
the  source  code with any word processor in non-document   mode,  
then  compile  your  code  with ALCYON  C.   It  is  possible  to  
write   code  in  any  language,   but  we are distributing  only 
the bindings for ALCYON C at this time.   Additional bindings are 
available  on  CompuServe.   You can  write your  own   bindings, 
although   you will have to adjust the include file  produced  by 
the Resource Construction Set.

After  successfully compiling your code,  you may can use SID  to 
debug it.   



                           End of Section 5







              Part 2: GEM RESOURCE CONSTRUCTION SET v1.0




INTRODUCTION

The   Resource Construction Set (RCS) is the tool you use to make 
resource  files containing drop-down  menus,  dialog  boxes,  and 
alert  boxes.   The RCS also  takes the  icons  and  bit   images  
you  draw  with IconEdit and makes them usable as resources.  You 
save resources  in  files,   which  contain  object  trees   with 
objects such as text strings, icons, and exit buttons.


This document is divided into three sections as follows:

   - Section  1:   a short tutorial with minimum explanation that 
     takes you through the construction of a dialog box.

   - Section  2:  an explanation  of  the  RCS  for  the   casual  
     user.     A  non-programmer  might  use  the  RCS  to design 
     mock-up  dialogs for a proposed application,  or perhaps  to 
     translate the text in a menu  for use in a foreign country.

   - Section  3:   technical  details  of  the  RCS,  of use  and 
     interest to programmers.

Note:  In this document, "tree" means tree icon;  "object"  means  
one   of   the  things you add to a tree once you open  the  tree 
icon.

Additional    Note:    Though  the  acronym  for   the   Resource 
Construction  Set is RCS,  resource files take the file extension 
".RSC".



Section 1:


GETTING STARTED WITH THE GEM RESOURCE CONSTRUCTION SET



This  walk-through  shows you how to make a simple  Dialog  tree.   
The  steps  you take here apply generally to all the trees in the 
RCS.



STARTING UP

To   begin  work,  double-click  on the  RCS.PRG  icon  from  the 
desktop.   


CHOOSING THE DIALOG TREE OPTION

Inside  the  RCS,  you notice five icons in the Partbox window at 
the top of the screen.   Click on the fourth,  which contains the 
word "Dialog".   This  is  the Dialog Tree icon.

Holding the mouse button down, drag the Dialog icon to the center 
of  the window labeled "Resource Construction Set".   This is the 
View  window.    Release  the mouse button.



NAMING THE DIALOG TREE

When  you  release  the  mouse  button,  a  notice appears in the 
center of the screen,  informing you that you can change the name  
and  type  of  your  Dialog tree.

Backspace over the default name, TREE1, and type "FOO".

Next click on the OK button.   The Dialog Tree icon labeled "FOO" 
appears in the upper left corner of the View window.



OPENING THE DIALOG TREE

Select the View window by clicking inside it,  then  double-click 
on FOO to  open it.    When  FOO is open, its name appears in the 
title bar of the View window.   The View window now shows a blank 
Dialog tree, FOO.


ASSEMBLING THE OBJECTS

Above  the  View window,  the Dialog Partbox window contains  the 
objects  you  use to make your Dialog tree.

Click  once  in  the  Dialog  Partbox window to select  it,  then 
drag the object labeled "BUTTON" to the FOO tree.  Drop it in the 
middle  of   the  View  window.   Go back for another button  and 
drop it below the first.

Now   get some text by dragging down a STRING object in the  same 
way you dragged the buttons.  Drop it to the left of the buttons.



CUSTOMIZING THE OBJECTS

Click  within the View window to "top" it (that is,  bring it  to 
the top and make it  active).     Then double-click on the  first 
button to open it.   An Attribute dialog appears, consisting of a 
list  of   object  characteristics.     Note  that SELECTABLE  is 
already chosen by default.  Click on EXIT to set its attribute.

At  the bottom of the dialog,  backspace over BUTTON and type  in 
"YES".  When you are finished, click on OK.

Open  the  second button and make it a  selectable  exit   button  
like   the   first.   This will be the default button;  click  on 
DEFAULT.   Over BUTTON,  type "CANCEL".   When you are  finished, 
click on OK.

Now  open the STRING object by double-clicking on it.   The  same 
Attribute  dialog appears.     Backspace over the word STRING and 
type "Do you want to continue?".   When you are through, click on 
OK.



NAMING AN OBJECT

Next,  give  the buttons names so that you can refer to  them  in 
your code.   Click on  the  first  button to select it.   Then go 
up to the Options Menu and select Name....   When the Object Name 
dialog  appears,  type in "FOOBUTN1".   Click on OK when   you're  
finished.    The button is now associated with the name FOOBUTN1.  
Select  the  second button and repeat the  process,  naming  this 
button FOOBUTN2.



REARRANGING OBJECTS

When you close the string object,  you might find that the string  
overlaps   the  buttons   or   that  the  layout  of  string  and 
buttons looks untidy.  To move the string, press in the middle of 
it and drag.   To move the buttons, press  inside them  and drag.  
Move the three objects around until they look like the example
below:


                                           ------------
                                           |   YES    |
                                           ------------
      Do you want to continue?
                                           ------------
                                           |  CANCEL  |
                                           ------------



CLOSING THE DIALOG TREE

Now you are ready to close FOO.   Click on the close  box,  which 
appears  at  the far left of FOO's title bar.



SAVING THE DIALOG TREE IN A FILE

Trees  are saved in .RSC files.   Go to the File Menu and  choose 
Save As....   The Item Selector dialog appears.  After Selection: 
on the right side of the  menu, type "FOOFILE.RSC".  When you are 
finished,  click  on  the OK button.   FOO is now saved  in  file 
FOOFILE.RSC.  In the process of saving your file,  a  .DEF  file, 
containing   naming  and  typing  information  on  your   objects  
and trees, was automatically created.



CLOSING AND EXITING

To close FOOFILE.RSC, click on the close box.

To  exit the RCS,  select Quit from the File Menu.   You are  now 
back at  the  GEM Desktop.



                               End of Section 1

Section 2:

DESCRIPTION OF THE RESOURCE CONSTRUCTION SET



This section gives you the information you need to make resources 
with  the RCS.   For  further  technical  details,   see  Section  
3, "Technical Matter for Programmers."




THE GEM RCS SCREEN


The RCS v1.0 screen has three parts:

   - the View window, in which editing takes place

   - the Partbox window, containing prototype trees or objects

   - the GEM Desktop, containing the clipboard and trash can

You   can  select  only one window at a time.   You  can  perform 
operations  in  the View or Partbox windows only after  selecting 
them.   To select a  window,   click within it.  When a window is 
currently selected, the title bar is striped.

If one window is atop another, the topmost is currently selected.  
To bring the bottom window to the top,  click anywhere within it.  
This operation  is  called "topping."

You  can  size and move the Partbox and View windows (but not the 
GEM  Desktop).   To size the Partbox or View window,  first  make 
sure it is selected.  Touch  the mouse  pointer  to  the size box 
in its lower right corner and drag.   To move a window, touch the 
pointer  to the title bar,  hold the  mouse  button   down,   and 
drag.     When you size the Partbox,  its contents are rearranged 
so  that  you  can see them despite the  new  dimensions  of  the 
window.  The same  is  true  of  the View window when it contains 
prototype trees.

You   can   rearrange   most trees and objects  within  the  View 
window  by  selecting  and dragging.   You cannot  rearrange  the 
contents  of the Partbox window.   On the GEM  Desktop,  you  can 
rearrange  the  trash  can  and clipboard by moving  them  to  an 
exposed piece of the desktop.

You  can size objects in the View window when you are  editing  a 
tree.    Objects contain  an  invisible  size box, or "handle" in 
the  lower right corner,  in the same place as in  windows.   You 
size them as you size windows: by dragging. 

Note  that  certain  trees  and  objects  carry  restrictions  on 
movement and  sizing. These will be discussed later.



MOUSE TECHNIQUES

Most   of  the mouse techniques used in the RCS are described  in 
your GEM Desktop manual.  Many of these operations, however, have 
special meanings in the RCS as follows:

   - A click always selects a tree or object.

   - A double-click always opens a tree or object for editing.

   - The effect of a drag depends on where you drag it.

        * Drag  a tree or object from the Partbox window to  make 
          a copy in the View window.

        * Drag  within  the  View window to move a tree  icon  or 
          object.

        * Drag  a  tree  or object from the View  window  to  the  
          clipboard   to  cut  it  from  the   View   window  and 
          store it temporarily in the clipboard.   If you  cut  a  
          tree,   a   small  T  appears  in  the  clipboard;   if  
          you   cut   an   object,   a  small   O  appears.   The 
          clipboard  can  contain only one tree or  object  at  a 
          time.  If you cut  two  items,  the first is lost.  The 
          clipboard  clears  every time you save or load a  file.  
          Duplicate trees and objects  lose all name information.

        * Drag  from  the  clipboard to the View window to  paste 
          a  tree  or object.   When you paste a tree,  the  Name 
          dialog appears  so  you can change its name or type.

        * To  delete  a  tree or object in the View window,  drag 
          it to the trash can.  Deleted items are irretrievable.

   - Shift-drag modifies a drag by making nondestructive  copies.  
     Drag  the  object  you want to copy while holding  down  the 
     Shift  key.   Duplicates of objects and trees lose the  name 
     information  associated  with  the original.

        * Shift-drag in the View window to make duplicates of  an 
          object or tree.

        * Shift-drag  from the View window to  the  clipboard  to  
          place  a duplicate object or tree in the clipboard.

        * Shift-drag   from  the  clipboard  to  the View  window 
          to  paste  a  duplicate  item  in   the   View   window  
          without   clearing   the clipboard.

   - To  size  an object in the View window, place the pointer on 
     its  size handle (its lower right corner)  and  drag.   This 
     operation  only   works while you are editing  a  tree;  you 
     can't size tree icons.

   - The  Ctrl  (Control)  key modifies the operations  above  by 
     taking you up one level in the "visual  hierarchy"  of  your  
     object   tree.      (See  "Visual  Hierarchy:  Relationships 
     Between  Trees  and Object" in Section 2.)   This  operation 
     applies only while you are editing a tree.

        * Ctrl-click  selects  the parent of the  object  clicked 
          upon.

        * Ctrl-drag  moves or sizes the  parent  of  the   object  
          selected.  Moving a parent always moves its progeny  as 
          well.

        * Ctrl-Shift-drag   duplicates  the parent of a  selected 
          object and all the progeny of that parent.

   - All  copy,  move,  and delete operations affect the selected 
     object and its progeny.



GEM RCS MENUS

The   RCS  includes  four menus at the top of the  screen:   Desk 
Menu, File Menu, Options Menu, and Global Menu.



DESK MENU

In  the entry "About the R.C.S." is the version  number,  author, 
and  copyright  date  of the RCS.   The other  entries  that  you 
normally see on your Desktop appear as usual.



FILE MENU

The File Menu contains the following commands:

New             Clears  the View window of trees and objects.   A 
                warning  message  appears to remind you  to  save 
                your workspace.

Open...         Opens   a  file,  bringing up the  Item  Selector 
                dialog  so  you  can enter  a  filename.  If  the 
                workspace  is already in use,   you  are  warned.   
                If  a tree or object is currently selected,  Open 
                opens that instead.

Merge...        Merges  a  second file with  the  file  currently 
                open.    Brings  up the  Item Selector dialog for 
                you to enter the second filename.  Check for name 
                conflicts  among trees and objects when you merge 
                files.   If  you  merge a file  containing  names 
                already defined in the  current  file,   the  RCS  
                makes   up   new  names   for    the  duplicates.    
                (Printing  out the .H or .I file is a good way to 
                check  for duplicates--see the   Output   command  
                in the Global Menu.)

Close           Closes   the  most recently opened file or  tree.  
                Closing  a file saves it to disk.   You can  also 
                close  by clicking on the  close box in the title 
                bar of the View window.

Save            Saves  the  current  resource file  on  disk  and 
                continues  the  edit.  You must  have  previously 
                named  the  file  by means of an  Open   or  Save  
                As...  command.  The names and types of trees and 
                objects are saved in a .DEF file.  You can create 
                other types of files,  depending  on the  current 
                output  setting (see the Global Menu).   A memory 
                compress occurs when the file is saved.

Save As...      Saves the workspace under a new filename.  Brings 
                up  the  Item Selector  dialog.  If  you  type in 
                a new filename, include the filetype .RSC.  There 
                are  no  required  naming  conventions   for  the  
                RCS,   but generally you name your resource  file 
                after  your  program (for  example,  FOO.PRG  and  
                FOO.RSC).     Trees  and  the resource files they 
                reside in are named separately.

Abandon         Reverts   to   the  last-saved  version  of  your 
                file.  If you are dissatisfied with  changes  you  
                made  to  a  particular  file, Abandon clears the 
                changes and gives you a fresh copy.

Quit            Takes  you  back  to the  GEM  Desktop.   If  the 
                workspace is in use, you are warned.




OPTIONS MENU

The Options Menu contains advanced commands,  technical in nature  
and   intended  for   programmers.     Therefore,  beginners  are 
advised  to  stay  clear of it.   The Options Menu  contains  the 
following commands:

Info...         Gives  information about  the  file,   tree,   or  
                object   currently  selected:     the  number  of 
                bytes used,  bytes remaining, trees, objects, and 
                other structures.

Name...         Names or renames a tree or object.  You may  also  
                be able to change the type of the tree or object.

Hide            Makes an object and any progeny disappear.

Unhide          Makes    the   hidden   progeny  of   an   object 
                reappear.   To expose a hidden object, select its 
                parent and choose Unhide.

Sort...         Sorts an object's progeny by X and Y coordinates.  
                This  command is  useful  for  achieving  a  tidy 
                appearance and ensuring that objects are drawn in 
                the  order  in  which  you arrange  them  on  the 
                screen.     Selecting  Sort  brings up  the  Sort 
                dialog,  which asks you how you want your objects 
                sorted.  You can sort as follows:

                   - X only

                   - X, then Y

                   - Y only

                   - Y, then X

                Your  choice depends on how the objects are  laid 
                out.   Note  that an  X  sort  is  done  left  to 
                right and a Y sort is done top to bottom.

Flatten         Removes      the     tree     level     selected,  
                "flattening"   the   tree.   Suppose   a   three-
                level  tree of parent, child, and grandchild.  If 
                the  child  is  selected,   Flatten  removes  the  
                child   and  promotes   the   grandchild   to   a  
                direct   relationship  with the parent.   Only  a 
                box-type object can be flattened.

Snap            Makes the position and size of an object  in  the  
                View  window automatically align with the nearest 
                coordinate on an invisible character grid.   Used 
                only  with  Free  trees,   which  do   not   have 
                automatic  snap.    Without snap, it is difficult 
                to get objects lined up exactly.

Load...         Loads a bit image or icon.  If  you  are  loading  
                an  icon,   a dialog appears,  asking whether you 
                want to load the data image, mask image, or both.




GLOBAL MENU


The Global Menu contains the following commands:

Output...       Selects  output  files to be created by the  RCS.    
                These   output  files  are   created   when   you  
                close   or  save a resource.   The  Output  Files 
                dialog appears, offering the following choices:

              Application Binding Files|Source Files for Resource
                  C         (*.H)                   *.C
                  Pascal    (*.I)

                The .H  option  generates  a  #define  that   you  
                include    when   compiling   your   C   language 
                application.   It  contains the numeric values of 
                the names you give trees and  objects.   Remember  
                that when  you  duplicate  a  tree or object, the 
                new  copy  loses all name  information.   The  .I 
                options   works  like  .H,   but  the  output  is  
                formatted for Pascal.   The .C option generates a 
                C language source of your resource, which you can 
                hand-edit and regenerate with RSCREATE.

Safety...       Sets   the   level   of   protection   on    your  
                files,  from  heavily guarded to unwatched.  When  
                you  select  Safety,  the  Resource Editing  Mode  
                dialog  appears.   It offers you three levels of
                protection:    locked,   normal,  and  expert  as 
                follows:

                   - Locked allows editing and sizing but forbids  
                     changes in   tree    structure.       Locked  
                     is   intended  for post-release changes such 
                     as    translation     of     strings     and 
                     internationalization   of   icons.    Values 
                     associated  with  tree and object names  are  
                     preserved;   you   need  not  recompile  the 
                     application after editing.

                   - Normal,    the    default    level,    warns  
                     you   before  rearranging   trees.    Normal 
                     permits  all  operations but warns  you   of  
                     impending    changes   in    hierarchy   and 
                     workspace clearance.

                   - In expert mode,  anything goes.   You get no 
                     warnings.



PARTBOX WINDOW CONTENTS

The  Partbox  window contains the object trees,  in the  form  of 
icons,   from   which  you   build  your  resources.    (The  GEM 
Programmer's Guide, Volume 2: AES explains object trees and their 
function in the GEM system.)  There are  five  kinds  of trees as 
follows:

Unknown         Serves  as  a  place  marker for trees of unknown 
                type.   If  the  .DEF  file of the tree  you  are 
                working on was somehow  lost  (or never  existed:  
                for example,  you created it with RSCREATE),  the 
                RCS  uses  Unknown.   If you build  a   hand-made  
                tree    containing  non-standard   objects,   use 
                Unknown as a placeholder.

Free            The   most  general  and flexible kind  of  tree. 
                Other   tree   types  have  their   own   editing 
                constraints.   The   only  rule  for  Free  trees  
                is that visual hierarchy prevails. Free trees are 
                useful mainly for building system-specific trees; 
                generally, they are not portable because they are 
                pixel-aligned.

Menu            Specifically  intended for drop-down menus in  an 
                application,  as  described in Section  5,  "Menu 
                Library,"  in the GEM Programmer's Guide,  Volume 
                2: AES.

Dialog          Creates   dialog   boxes  for  user   input.    A 
                stricter  form of Free tree  in  that   character  
                snap is enforced,  resulting in portability among 
                machines.  See "Dialog Boxes" in Section 7 in the 
                GEM Programmer's Guide, Volume 2: AES.

Alert           Warns  the user of impending consequences or that  
                something  is not  right.     A  more  restricted  
                form  of  Dialog tree.   See "Alerts" in  Section 
                7,  "Form  Library,"  in  the  GEM   Programmer's 
                Guide, Volume 2: AES.



TREE OPERATIONS

This  section describes the various things you can do with  whole 
trees.



Starting a New Tree

To begin work on a new tree,  select the Partbox window.   In the 
Partbox window,  select the kind of tree you want and drag a copy 
of  it  to  the  View  window.   Drop the copy within the window.  
The new tree opens into the Name dialog.



The Name Dialog

The   Name   dialog   appears   when  you create a  new  tree  by 
dragging it from the Partbox window,  pasting from the clipboard, 
or  duplicating a tree in  the  View window  by   Shift-dragging.  
In   the  Name dialog you can name your new tree and  change  its 
type.

After  you exit the Name dialog,  the dialog closes and the  tree 
retreats to  its place in the View window.   To continue work  on 
the new tree, you must open it.

Naming   a  Tree:     Trees must have names so that you can refer 
to  them  in  your code.  When you drag a new tree  to  the  View 
window,   it   automatically  takes  a default  name   based   on  
its   order  among  the trees that already exist:   for  example, 
TREE1,  TREE2,  etc.  You  can  have up to 55 trees in  the  View 
window.

Changing  a  Tree's Type:   The Name dialog   also   accommodates  
changes  in  tree type.     The current tree type is highlighted.  
Select the new type by clicking on it.  Be careful about changing 
the type of a tree to Menu  or  Alert  if  you aren't  absolutely  
sure of its nature.   Change it to a Dialog first so you can open 
and   look  at  it  without  undesirable   consequences.   (Trees  
mistakenly   typed  as menus are especially prone to hanging  the 
system.)



Rearranging Trees

You can rearrange trees in the View window as follows:

   - To   move   a   tree  to a new position  between  two  other 
     trees, drag it between them and let go.  The two trees part, 
     allowing  the  newcomer to slip in.

   - To   move   a  tree  to the end of a list of trees  in  your 
     View window,  drag it down to a clear area of the window and 
     let go.

   - To  move  a tree to the front of the list,  drag it  so   it  
     touches   the first  tree  and  let go.   The  former  first 
     tree shifts right and the new tree takes its place.



Opening a Tree

Use either of the following operations to open a tree:

   - Double-click on the tree.

   - Select it and choose Open from the File Menu.

When you open a tree,  its name (either the name you gave it or a 
default  name) appears  in  the title bar of the View window.  In 
the Partbox window,  prototype objects appear where the prototype 
trees formerly were.



Closing a Tree

To close a tree after editing, use one of the following methods:

   - Click  on  the close box at the far left of the View  window 
     title bar.

   - Choose Close from the File Menu.

Closing a tree is not the same as saving it to disk.   To save  a  
tree,  choose Save or Save As... from the File Menu.  This stores 
the tree in a .RSC file.

OBJECTS

The objects that flesh out your tree appear in the Partbox window 
when you open the tree.  These available objects differ according 
to what kind  of  tree  you are  working on.  Objects are dragged 
into the View window.  The surface of the View window, when a new 
tree is opened, constitutes the highest  level  of  the
tree (the root object).



Partbox Window Contents and Tree Type

For  Free and Dialog trees,  the objects available in the Partbox 
window are the same.   Menu trees and Alert trees have their  own 
individual   Partbox   contents.   Unknown  trees do not  have  a 
corresponding Partbox.   If you want to add objects to an Unknown 
tree, you have to change its type first.

The kind of tree you have open is reflected in the title  bar  of  
the   Partbox  window.     If   the  tree  is   a   Dialog,   for  
example, the title reads "Dialog Partbox".



Free Trees and Dialog Trees:  Objects Available

The  following  objects are available in Free Tree   and   Dialog  
Tree  Partboxes.   The drawings below are intended to suggest the 
way  the prototype objects appear in the Partbox.   The names  in 
parentheses  are  the names these objects assume  in  Section  6, 
"Object Library," in the GEM Programmer's Guide, Volume 2: AES.
    ________
o  | BUTTON |    --(G_BUTTON)  Boxed string that the end user
   |________|      selects to indicate his choice among
                   alternatives.

o  STRING        --(G_STRING)  Boxless character string,
                   generally consisting of explanatory text
                   for the user.

o  EDIT:_____    --(G_FTEXT)  Editable, formatted text
                   field.

    ___________
o  | EDIT:____ | --(G_FBOXTEXT)  Editable, formatted text
   |___________|   field with box.

    ___________
o  |  _______  | --(G_IBOX)  Hollow box through which you
   | |_______| |   can see the dither pattern or text
   |___________|   beneath.  (See class 2 Attribute dialogs
                   later in this section for more information
                   on dither patterns.)

    ___________
o  |           | --(G_BOX)  Opaque box.
   |___________|


o  TEXT          --(G_TEXT)  Formatted text, for which you
                   can specify sizes, colors, fonts, and
                   masking.

   _______
o  |  C  |       --(G_BOXCHAR)  Single character in an opaque
   |_____|         box.

   ____________
o  | BOXTEXT  |  --(G_BOXTEXT)  Same as TEXT, but with a box.
   |__________|

   _________
   |       |
o  |       |     --(G_ICON)  Displays an icon (data plus
   | ICON  |       mask) made with IconEdit.
   |_______|

   _________
   |       |
o  |       |     --(G_IMAGE)  Displays a bit image
   | IMAGE |       (data field only) made with IconEdit.
   |_______|


Menu Trees:  Objects Available

The   objects   in  the  Menu  Partbox  window  are  limited   to 
those components practical in menus.  They are the following:

o  TITLE         --Prototype title for your menu bar.

o  ENTRY         --Prototype entry to be placed in a
                   drop-down menu.

o  ---------     --Separator line.  Divides entries in a
                   drop-down menu into logical groups for
                   user's convenience.

   _________
o  |       |     --Hollow box.  Used as placeholders in drop-
   |_______|       down menus for elements such as dither
                   patterns and colors that you add at run-
                   time.  


Alert Trees: Objects Available

Alerts generally employ the standard GEM system warning icons,  a 
message,  and a way for the user to get out of the  alert.   They 
use the following components:

   __________
o  | BUTTON |    --Exit button, with characteristic heavy
   |________|      border.

o  Message Line  --Nonformattable.

o  NOTE icon     --Depicts a hand with upraised forefinger.  A
                   prototype NOTE icon is already in place
                   tree, because NOTEs are the most commonly
                   used alerts.

o  WAIT icon     --Depicts a question mark.

o  STOP icon     --Depicts a hand with palm exposed.


OBJECT OPERATIONS

The   following  descriptions  apply  specifically to objects  in 
Free  and  Dialog  trees and generally to Menu and  Alert  trees.   
Exceptions  in  Menu  and  Alert trees are noted.



Adding Objects to Trees

To  move  an  object  from the Partbox window to your tree, first 
make  sure the Partbox window is selected.   Drag a copy  of  the 
object into the View window and drop  it.   Note that this is the 
same  procedure  you  use  to copy trees into  the  View  window.  
Remember that a Shift-drag makes additional  copies  of  objects.  
If   you  want  to add three buttons to your tree,  for  example, 
you  can  drag  one down from the Partbox and   copy   it   twice  
rather  than  dragging  down  three separate buttons.

Exceptions   for  Menu  Trees:   You  can  drag objects  only  to 
their  appropriate places.   Titles,  for example,  belong in the 
menu title bar  after  the  default entries  "Desk"  and  "File".   
You can drag down Entries,  Separator Lines,  and Boxes only when 
you have somewhere to put them (that is,  after you  select   the 
title   of   the  menu  you want,  and the white box,  that  will 
contain your menu, drops down).

You  cannot drag objects to or from the Desk Menu;  nor  can  you 
edit the contents of the Desk Menu, except for the first line.

Exceptions   for   Alert  Trees:  You cannot have more  than  one 
warning icon in an Alert tree.   To replace the default NOTE icon 
with another kind of  icon,  drag the  other icon anywhere within 
the Alert tree.   (If you do not want an icon at all,  drag it to 
the  trash  can.)  You are limited to three or fewer buttons  and 
five or fewer message lines.



Moving and Sizing Objects in the View Window

To   move  an  object  around in the View  window,  drag  it.  To 
discard an object,  drag it to the trash can.  To cut it, drag it  
to   the   clipboard.   To   make   a duplicate   of  it  on  the 
clipboard, Shift-drag it to the clipboard. To duplicate it within 
the View window, use Shift-drag.

You  can size any object by dragging the lower right corner  away 
from  or  toward the  center  of  the  object.   Objects  without 
visual extents, or boxes, around them (such as strings, formatted 
text,  editable  text  fields,   bit  images,   and icons)   size 
automatically  when you alter the length of the text or  size  of 
the  bit  image.   Objects with visual extents   require   manual  
sizing.     Note  that sizing  is  limited:   the RCS "clamps" an 
object, preventing you from violating visual hierachy.  You can't 
size  an   object   so  that  it  extends  beyond   its  parent's  
boundaries,   nor   can  you  size  down  a parent so that it  no 
longer contains its progeny.

Exceptions for Menu Trees:  The default first entry in  the  Desk  
Menu,   "Your  message here",  is the exception to the rule  that 
objects without visual extents size automatically:   its size  is 
fixed.   This  entry  is  obligatory.     You  can (and   should)  
change the text;  you cannot, however, move it or throw the entry 
away and have no text there at all.   Neither can you move, edit, 
or  throw  away the  remaining  default  objects,  the  Separator 
Line,  and desk accessories 1-6.  Think of desk accessory entries 
as placeholders.  They fill in appropriately at run-time  if  you  
have   desk   accessories  (such  as  a   clock  or  calculator).  
Otherwise, the unused slots disappear at run-time.

The prototype File Menu provides a first entry,  Quit,  for  your  
convenience.   Before  adding other entries,  size the  drop-down 
menu  by Ctrl-dragging the lower corner.   The RCS does not allow 
drop-down menus larger than one-fourth of the screen area.

Exceptions  for  Alert  Trees:    You  cannot size objects.  They 
automatically expand or contract to contain your text.   You  can 
drag Alert tree  contents  to the trash can or clipboard only.



Opening an Object

To  open  an  object,  double-click on it or select it and choose 
Open  from the File Menu.   The object expands into an  Attribute 
dialog, in which you  set  its characteristics.

Exception   for  Menu  Trees:   In the Desk Menu,  only the first 
entry opens.  It does not auto-size.

Exception for Alert Trees:  The icon object does not open.



ATTRIBUTE DIALOGS

Certain  objects  are compatible,  sharing  like  attributes  and 
identical  Attribute dialogs.   There are five classes among  the 
objects:

Class 1         Unformatted text (Buttons, Strings, and Titles).

Class 2         Boxes (Boxes, Hollow Boxes, and Boxchars).

Class 3         Formatted      text     (Text,     Text-in-a-Box,  
                Editable  Text,  and Editable Text-in-a-Box).

Class 4         Bit images.

Class 5         Icons.

Note:   Bit  images and icons are compatible with   nothing   and  
form  their  own one-member classes.



Class 1 Attribute Dialogs

For   Buttons and Strings,  the Attribute dialog consists of  two 
parts:  a set of object flags, summarized below (and described in 
your  GEM  Programmer's  Guide,  Volume  2:   AES  under  "Object 
Library")  and  a field for text entry.   The flags are  toggles.  
Select them to turn  them  on  or  off.  At  the  bottom  of  the 
Attribute   dialog,  the current text,  namely STRING or  BUTTON, 
occupies the text field.  Backspace over it and type the text you 
want.  (Instead of backspacing, you  can  use  <Esc> to clear the 
whole string at once.)  Note that auto-sizing applies to  strings 
and titles.



Object Flags


Selectable      Can  be  selected (thrown into reverse video)  at 
                run-time if user clicks on it.

Default         Selected  automatically  when the user  enters  a 
                <CR> at run-time.   On a button, DEFAULT causes a 
                triple-weight  border.   If you have  more   than 
                one  default set in a particular tree,  you  will 
                not get an error at run-time, but neither can you  
                predict the results.

Exit            Returns   the  user  from the dialog in which  it 
                appeared to the application at hand when the user 
                clicks  on  it  at  run-time.   The  most  common 
                methods of exit are by OK and CANCEL buttons.  On 
                a button, EXIT causes a double-weight border.

Radio Button    (abbreviated   as   RBUTTON   in  the   GEM   AES 
                Programmer's  Guide) Object  is  a  member  of  a 
                set   of  radio  buttons.    Radio  buttons   are 
                analogous to the buttons on a car radio--pressing 
                a   second button makes the first pop out.   This 
                means you can select only one member of a set  of 
                radio  buttons  at a time.   Members of a set  of 
                radio  buttons must be nested at the  same  level 
                within a common parent object.

Checked         Draws  a check mark inside the left margin of the 
                object.

Shadowed        Draws   a   drop   shadow   around   the   object  
                (usually  a  box).  Conflicts with outlining.

Outlined        Draws   an   outline  around  a   boxed   object.    
                Conflicts with shadowing;  has no effect on boxes 
                with outward borders.

Crossed         Draws   an  X  through  the  object   in   system 
                background color.  Used with boxed objects only.

Editable        Can be edited by the user at run-time.  Used with 
                editable text objects.

Touch Exit      Allows  the  user to exit by pressing  the  mouse 
                button  over the object.   Differs from an  exit, 
                which requires a press and release.

Disabled        Draws the object at half-intensity (gray).    The  
                user  cannot select disabled objects.



Class 2 Attribute Dialogs


For   Boxes,   Hollow Boxes,  and Boxchars,  the Attribute dialog 
contains the same object flags as in class 1.   In addition,  the 
Attribute dialog contains options as follows:


dither pattern  
                Eight available.

background color
                Offers 16 VDI color indices in hexadecimal.

border color    Same as for background color.

border width    Seven  variations available:   no border,   three  
                inward  widths, and three outward widths.

enter           Enter any character.

character color 
                Similar to background color.  Offers same colors.

masking rules   Select   replacement  mode  or  transparent  mode 
                for characters.   You can stamp characters on top 
                of the  background  or  replace the background.

A  dither  pattern  is  a background fill pattern.   To choose  a 
dither  pattern,  color,  or  border width,  click on one of  the 
choices  or  click  on   the   left-  or  right-arrow  to  expose 
additional  choices.    The  current  selection  appears  in  the 
"Selected" box.  Note that background effects will not be seen in 
hollow   boxes  and  that characters are only  significant  in  a 
Boxchar type.



Class 3 Attribute Dialogs

For  Text,  Boxtext,  Editable  Text, and Editable Text-in-a-Box, 
the  Attribute  dialog  includes all the features  of   class   2  
with   the   following   additions pertaining to  text  size  and 
format:

font            Choice of large or small fonts for text.

justify         Justifies text left, center, or right.

PTMPLT>         Template for text entry.

PVALID>         Validation field for text entry.

PTEXT>          Text entry field.

If  the  object you are working with is Text or Boxtext, you need 
to enter only the contents of the PTEXT field.   If the object is 
Editable   Text   or  Editable Text-in-a-Box,  you must  use  all 
three fields.

Note  auto-sizing's  effect on class 3 objects:   The new size of 
a  TEXT  type is determined by the length of the   PTEXT   field.    
The   new  size  of  an  FTEXT (editable  text  field)  type   is 
determined by the length of its PTMPLT field.   There is no auto-
sizing for boxed text objects because they have visual extents.

The  template,  validation field, and text entry field (P fields) 
are  explained in your GEM Programmer's Guide,  Volume 2:  AES in 
Section  6,   "Object  Library" under "TEDINFO Structure."   Note 
that  in  the RCS,  PTMPLT fields use a tilde (~) in place of  an 
underline (_) to avoid confusion between the field itself and the 
placeholders  for  editable  characters.  The  following  example 
illustrates the use of the  template,   validation   field,   and  
the   text  entry  fields.   It constructs an editable text field 
in which the end user types the date.

PTMPLT>Today's Date:  ~~/~~/~~_________________
PVALID>~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~99~99~99_________________
 PTEXT>~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~01~01~85_________________


Explanation  of  template:  Change the template to "Today's Date:  
" instead of the default,  "EDIT:", backspace over EDIT, and type 
in  the   new   string.      The  tildes   in  the  template  are 
placeholders for characters that will change later.  They are the 
only  part  of  the template that the end user will  be  able  to  
edit.   The slashes, as non-tildes, are permanent features of the 
template.

Explanation    of  validation  field:    The   validation   field 
determines  what  kind of characters the end user can  enter;  it 
determines  what constitutes valid  input.   Tildes appear  under 
"Today's Date:  " and the slashes, indicating that "Today's Date:  
"  and  the slashes are literal strings and will appear  as  they 
are;   they require  no  validation.   The nines under the tildes 
in the template mean that the end user must type in digits  where 
the nines occur.

Explanation  of text entry field:   The digits you type under the  
nines  in  the validation field will appear as the default entry.  
The end user must type over them to change the date.



Icon Attribute Dialogs

Icon Attribute dialogs contain object flags as for other  classes  
and   special attributes for coloring icons and mixing  text  and 
icons as follows:

foreground color
                Determines  color of one-bits in icon data  (one-
                bits are usually black).

background color
                Determines  color  of  zero-bits  in  icon   data  
                (zero-bits  are usually white).

text            To   insert  text   within,   above,   or   below  
                icon.  Useful for labeling.

character       To   insert  a  single  character  within   icon.    
                Example:    floppy disk icons.

The   Icon  Attribute  dialog contains two Locate boxes:  a  Text 
Locate box under the Text field, and a Character Locate box under  
the  Character  field.     For positioning text within your icon, 
click  on  any of the three levels in the Text  Locate  box.   To 
position  a character within your  icon,   click  on  any  square 
within the grid.

The  note at the bottom of the menu indicates that you must  load 
a  data  or mask file to change an icon in the RCS.   Select  the 
icon object in the View  window,  go to the Option Menu, and pick 
Load to load a data or mask file, or both.

Note  on auto-sizing of icons:   The RCS generates new sizes  for 
bit objects when you load them.   To change the automatic sizing, 
drag the size handle.



Bit Image Attribute Dialogs

Bit  Image Attribute dialogs contain the standard  object   flags  
and  an  Image Color  attribute.     Like  the color selectors in 
other Attribute dialogs,  this offers 16 VDI-index colors.   Note 
that  you must load new  data  with  the  Load command  from  the 
Options Menu.

See   the  note  concerning  auto-sizing  under  "Icon  Attribute 
Dialogs."



Exiting an Attribute Dialog

Press  <RETURN> or select OK to assign the attributes  and  close 
the object.



Naming and Retyping Objects

You  can  name and retype objects the same way you can  name  and 
retype  trees.   To  name or rename an object,  click on  it  and 
choose  the  Name  command  from  the Options  Menu.    The  Name  
dialog  appears,  allowing  you to enter the object's  name.   To 
delete  a pre-existing name,  backspace over it and  enter  blank 
spaces.

The  Name dialog also provides an opportunity to retype  objects.  
You can retype objects  within  their classes only.  For example, 
you  can retype a Button as a String because Buttons and  Strings 
are  members  of  the  same  class,   but  you cannot  retype   a 
Button  as a Boxchar,  as their types are incompatible.   If  the 
object  selected  is incompatible with other  objects,  the  Name  
dialog  does  not provide a means of retyping.



TIPS AND CONCEPTS



Visual Hierarchy:  Relationships between Trees and Objects

The  highest  level of a tree is the surface of the  View  window 
when  you  open the tree.   Any solitary object you drag  to  the 
surface  is a  direct  child  of  the View  window  surface.   An 
object within another object--a Button within a Box,  say--is the 
child  of  the  containing object.   Because  this  hierarchy  is 
apparent at a glance, it is called "visual hierarchy."

Note   that   according  to  the  rules of  visual  hierarchy,  a 
parent object must completely contain its progeny;  objects  that  
jut  out  from  an  object  that otherwise  contains them are not 
related  to that object.   With objects that are supposed  to  be 
nested at the same level,  such as radio buttons, you  must  take 
care  that  the visual hierarchy of the tree accurately  reflects 
your intentions.

Remember  that  a  mouse  operation modified by Ctrl takes you up 
a  step  in  the hierarchy and that Flatten,  a  command  in  the 
Options Menu,  removes a  level  in the  hierarchy.   Recall  too 
that any delete,  move,  or copy affecting an object also affects 
its progeny.



Notes on Making Icons and Bit Images

Icons  and  bit images are drawn with IconEdit and are  saved  in 
.ICN files.     An icon consists of data and a mask.  A bit image 
consists of data only.   You must load .ICN files into the RCS to 
turn  them  into  resources.   As bit  images  are  but   simpler 
versions  of  icons (in that they contain data only),  the  notes 
that  follow  focus mainly on icons,  with  bit-image  exceptions 
indicated.

IMPORTANT  NOTE:   AT  THE  TIME OF THE INITIAL RELEASE  OF  THIS 
          DEVELOPER  KIT ICONEDIT WAS NOT READY FOR  RELEASE.   A 
          facility for creating Icons in the 68K environment will 
          be  provided  in  a  future revision the  GEM  DOS  68K 
          Developer Kit.   If you have the GEM 8088 Developer Kit 
          then you may create your Icons in that environment  and 
          move them to the 68K environment. 


To load a .ICN file,  drag an icon object from the Free or Dialog 
Partbox window and  drop it in the View window.   Select the icon 
object.   Go  up to the Options Menu and select Load.   The  Icon 
Load dialog appears, and you can choose to load the data or mask, 
or both.

Exception for bit images:  No Load dialog appears.

When   you   load  the data or mask,  the  Item  Selector  dialog 
appears so that you can click on the .ICN file you want.   If you 
choose  both  mask  and  data,   the Item Selector appears twice, 
once for the data and once for the mask.   Exit the Item Selector 
dialog.   The data or mask you selected (or both) now appears  in 
the View window.

If   you   loaded   just the data,  click on the icon  again  and 
choose  Load  to  load its mask.   When both data  and  mask  are 
loaded, the files merge.  Open the  icon by  double-clicking  and  
set  its  attributes.    When you save the object tree containing 
your icon, it becomes a resource just like any other.

Remember  that if you want to redraw the icon image  itself,  you 
have to go  back to IconEdit.



Memory Limits

You  can have a maximum of 60 trees (on certain machines you  can 
see only 55 of these) occupying a total of 30K bytes. These trees  
can   contain  a  cumulative maximum  of 1,250 objects,  of which 
500  can have names.   As names are stored in a  separate  index, 
they  do  not count against your  30K  bytes.   When  in   doubt, 
display   the   Options  Menu  and choose  Info...  to  see  your 
storage  usage.   You will be warned if you reach the end of  the 
memory buffer or name index.








                               End of Section 2



Section 3:


TECHNICAL MATTER FOR PROGRAMMERS



This section is for programmers who need to incorporate resources 
in their code and understand how the RCS works with the GEM AES.



FURTHER EXPLANATION OF MENU AND ALERT TREES

An  Alert  tree  is like a free string after it is interpreted by 
form_alert at run-time.   The rules for alerts are those enforced 
by  form_alert:   no  more  than one  image  (from   a   set   of 
three),  up  to  five  message  lines  (of  no  more  than  forty 
characters each), and one to three buttons.

Menu trees are characterized by parallel structure of  title  bar  
entries   and  drop-down   menus  and  critical   sizing  of  bar 
objects.  The RCS enforces these constraints.



RESPECT FOR TREE TYPING

You  can freely retype trees from a more-restricted to  a   less-
restricted   type  (for   example,   from Menu or Alert  tree  to 
Dialog or Free tree).   Do not try to go the other way unless you 
clearly understand the  required  format;   you  can make the RCS 
crash.

If  you  load  an  existing  resource that lacks a .DEF file (and 
therefore  you don't know what kinds of trees you  have),  retype 
the trees as frees or  dialogs to examine them.

Be  careful when pasting objects from other trees into  menus  or 
alerts.   The RCS rejects most incompatible objects,  but you may 
find an exception--and  the  RCS may hang.

Remember  to type non-standard trees as unknowns.  A tree is non-
standard  if  it  contains  user-defined  objects  or  unresolved 
indirects  or  pointers.    (You  must still   obey  inter-object 
linkage  conventions,  or the RCS will hang when writing out your 
resource.)



DETAILS ON OBJECT TYPES

Unformatted Text
                These   objects   are always written  in  single-
                spaced,  full-sized  system  font,  using  system 
                foreground  and  background  colors   in  replace  
                mode.    The  obspec (object specification field) 
                is  a  long pointer to  a  zero-terminated  ASCII 
                string.

Box             The   obspec   contains   packed    bit    fields  
                defining  the  object attributes.

Formatted Text  
                The   obspec   is   a long pointer to  a  TEDINFO 
                structure  (see  the  GEM  Programmer's    Guide,  
                Volume   2:   AES   for  information  on  TEDINFO  
                structures).   The TEDINFO contains long pointers 
                to text,  template,  and validation strings  (the 
                latter  two are only used  in  editable  fields).  
                In  addition,  the  TEDINFO  contains  the   same  
                information   as  types,   as   well   as    font   
                and  justification  designators.   If you want  a 
                default character to appear in the formatted text 
                field at run-time,  enter it in the corresponding  
                position in PTEXT.   If you don't want a default, 
                enter blanks or a null string.   Be careful:  The  
                PTEXT   string  must  be as long  as  the  PVALID 
                string,  or  you must allocate and link a scratch 
                PTEXT before activating the dialog at   run-time.  
                Failure   to do so will damage the resource  when 
                the  user starts typing.   See the example in the 
                GEM Sample Application.

Bit Images      A  bit image is a maskless rectangular bit  image 
                in   transparent  mode.   The obspec  is  a  long 
                pointer  to  a  BITBLK  structure.    The  BITBLK  
                contains    horizontal    and    vertical    size  
                fields,  the writing color, and a long pointer to 
                the actual data.

Icons           An   icon   consists   of  the   combination   of  
                data   and  mask  bit   images,   with   optional 
                associated text  string  and  characters.   These  
                images  are  made  in  IconEdit and saved in .ICN 
                files,  which  contain an ASCII representation of 
                the binary image.   The obspec  of  an  icon is a 
                long  pointer  to  an  ICONBLK  structure.    The 
                ICONBLK contains long pointers to the  data   and  
                mask   bit images  and  the  text   strings,   as  
                well    as   X   and  Y  sizes,   foreground  and 
                background colors, an optional character, and the 
                relative positions of text, character, and image.

User-defined Objects
                User-defined objects constitute a sixth class  of 
                objects.  This type is  handled  at  run-time  by  
                application-specific code.   User-defined objects 
                are not supported by the RCS and rs_load; you set  
                them  up  at run-time.   See sections  6.3.5  and 
                6.3.6  in the GEM Programmer's Guide,  Volume  2: 
                AES.



A NOTE ON OBJECT FLAGS

Besides  the  object flags mentioned under  "Attribute   Dialogs"  
in  Section  2,  there are three other flags you can set for your 
resources:

Hidetree        Makes  an object and its progeny invisible.   The 
                Object   Library  neither  finds  nor  draws  the 
                object.    Hide  and  Unhide,   which affect this 
                flag, are options in the RCS File Menu.

Lastob          Flag   set   for  the  last   object   in   every  
                tree.   Generated automatically by the RCS.  This 
                flag  must be set or,   when  you tab   off   the  
                last editable field of a dialog at run-time,  GEM 
                may hang.

Indirect        The obspec is a long pointer to the actual obspec 
                value.  The indirect  flag  is  not  supported by 
                the RCS.   You build it at run-time.  See the GEM 
                Programmer's Guide, Volume 2: AES.



HIERARCHY OF STRUCTURES WITHIN A RESOURCE

Internal  linkage  of resource and trees and how  offspring   are  
organized   into  trees  are described in  the  GEM  Programmer's 
Guide, Volume 2: AES.



MORE ON MEMORY

The  RCS  uses  memory  from  its  workspace  as you edit.  There 
is no garbage collector.   You recover space by saving the  file; 
Save writes out  and  reloads the resource.   (It's good practice 
to save your work frequently anyway.)

Use Info... to check on the size of your resource, which can grow 
quickly.   Info...  gives  the working byte  total.   This  total  
differs  somewhat  from  the  actual output  because  alerts take 
less  space when emitted as strings and because the RCS does  not 
duplicate  strings  and   images   from   Shift-dragged   objects  
until  required.    These duplicate objects are resolved when you 
save the file and may add to the size of the resource.

If  you must create a larger resource,  generate it in two  parts 
and combine them by  hand using RSCREATE.   There is an  absolute 
limit  of 64K in a resource.   You can chain resources,  but only 
after  clearing any references to the old one (such as  menu  and 
desktop definitions) in the AES and making an rs_free call to the 
AES.



SECONDARY UPDATES: USING RSCREATE

You   make   secondary  updates  when  you   need    to    create  
specialized  objects  or include  "free"  strings or images.   To 
begin  the  secondary  update,  create a .C file  from  the  RCS, 
containing  a C language source of your resource,  and  hand-edit 
it.

To  regenerate  the  resource,   include  it  in  the  .C file in 
RSCREATE.C and compile,  link, and run RSCREATE.  This produces a 
regular .RSC file, which  you an edit normally in the RCS.

The .C file created by the RCS contains some mnemonics for object 
types as well as base numbers for each object tree.   When adding 
any new  object,  TEDINFO,   etc.,   insert  it at the end of the 
current entries.   Update the tree base definitions if you insert 
new objects into existing trees.

You must use the secondary update process to insert free  strings  
(other   than alerts) and free bitblks.   Do this early on in the 
creation  of  your  resource to minimize the  amount  of  editing 
involved.   You  must  put  all  non-alert  free strings ahead of 
alert strings or the RCS will alter their order at output.

If   you  know  you will alter the object structure by  hand,  do 
not enter object names until your editing is  complete.   Changes  
in   object  numbers  caused  by RSCREATE  will  not be known  to 
the RCS, and you may have to re-enter your .DEF file.

The  RCS  always emits object trees in  pre-order:   root  first,  
followed   by   its children,   left  to  right,   with the  rule 
applied recursively.   Any hand-built trees that pass through the 
RCS  will  be  changed to this  order.  Don't   build  code  that 
depends on some other ordering.
Be   aware   that   some   C  compilers  fold  duplicate  strings 
together when you compile RSCREATE.  This can present problems at 
run-time  if  the strings are to be  edited.   Run  the  resource 
through the RCS to resolve the duplicate strings.

For  more  information  on RSCREATE,  see Section  4,  "Notes  on 
RSCREATE."



TIPS FOR SAVING TIME

When  you are laying out a dialog,  put related text items  in  a 
box.    That  way,  you  can move and center them as a unit; when 
you're satisfied, flatten the box to save memory.

When  possible,  drag one of each of the part types you need into 
the View window and  use  Shift-drag  for  copies.    This  saves 
you the tedium of topping the Partbox window every time you  need 
a new object.

If  you  have several similar objects (such as   radio   buttons)  
within   a   tree,  define   one  of them and then  make  copies, 
editing only what differs among them instead of setting them  all 
individually.

Often  entire  subtrees  are nearly duplicated within a  tree  or  
among  a set of trees.    Create a prototype of the  subtree  and 
copy it, using Shift-drag or the clipboard, or both.

For  frequently  used icons,  subtrees,  and the like,  create  a 
"library"   resource  file   or  files.    Use Merge  to  copy  a 
library into your working resource,  make copies of the parts you 
want using the clipboard, then delete  unneeded  trees.  You  can  
use  a  library  as  a  means of standardizing the appearance  of 
your  applications  if you include prototype dialogs of your  own 
design.     An  aside:  the merge/delete process uses  workspace.  
Save your work to get the space back.

Take  advantage  of  the quirks of the Menu and Alert trees.   To 
make more menu bar entries, point at an existing entry, hold down 
the  Shift  key,   and  do  a "drag-in-place" by holding down the 
mouse  button a short while.   The copies zip down the bar.   You 
can  do the same thing with message strings and buttons in  Alert 
trees.



HINTS ON FORMAT

For  the Resource File:  Arranging your trees as follows can make 
things easier for you.  Put your Menu trees first.   Group Dialog 
trees  next,  then any Free trees.  Non-standard  trees  go  last  
so that you can hand-edit them easily.   Establish your own tree- 
and  object-naming  conventions so as to avoid naming  conflicts.  
Print your .H and .I files occasionally to check for errors.

In Menus:   Make sure your entries totally cover each  drop-down.  
If  they  don't,  they'll look sloppy when selected and  reverse-
highlighted  at run-time.   Use the disabled  dashes  object   to  
separate   unrelated  menu  entries and to set off  entries  that 
could  cause  problems if  selected   accidentally.     Inserting  
two leading  spaces  before your entries yields a  neat,  uniform 
look.  If the entry leads to a dialog (such as Save As...) follow 
it  with three dots.    After  your entries  are  complete,  sort 
them  by  Y  axis,  using  the Sort command  in  the  File  Menu; 
otherwise,  they'll be drawn in the order  in  which  they   were  
created, which usually looks slap-dash.

Leave   about  a  third  of  the  menu  bar clear.   You'll  need 
the   space  if  you  internationalize  your  program,   and   an 
uncluttered  menu  bar  is  easier  to   read  and   use.   Avoid 
clutter  in general.   Make sure menu entries don't look  cramped 
and that menu titles aren't too long.   Remember to name the menu 
titles as well as the entries.

In  Dialogs:     Use  the  standard  frame:    a two-pixel inward 
border with an outline.   Sort any radio buttons by Y first, then 
X.  Sort  the  whole dialog  the same   way.     The  result:   a 
smooth,  natural-looking drawing order.   Place exit buttons near 
the   right  edge  of  your  dialogs,   and  standardize    their  
appearance  and  placement by creating your own prototype  dialog 
and  putting it in a library resource.   Selectable  objects  are 
easier  to  point  at  if  they  are  large  and  maintain  ample 
space around their borders.

In   Alerts:    Keep   alerts   simple.    Avoid   harsh-sounding 
"computerese" and jargon. Try to limit alerts to two exit buttons 
to  avoid  confusion and  clutter.  You can   avoid  some  alerts 
altogether with a little creative thought.  For example, you  can  
disable inappropriate menu entries and simply forbid certain ill-
conceived actions.



MORE ON THE VISUAL HIERARCHY RULE

Every  object  owns a screen rectangle determined by its X, Y, W, 
and  H fields.   All of an object's offspring must be within that 
rectangle;   the   offspring   do  not  need   to   be  disjoint.  
Object X,  Y fields are positive displacements from the  parent's 
X,  Y coordinates.   This rule applies recursively.   In the case  
of  non-disjoint  siblings,   the  rightmost  (last added) is the 
last  drawn,  and is located by an objc_find with coordinates  in 
the overlapping area.



Circumventing Visual Hierarchy

Flouting the rules of visual hierarchy is not recommended, but it 
can  be  useful  for visual  effects  or  creating  sophisticated 
selector subtrees.   To "cheat," be sure to insert the object you 
want  to establish as the  top  object  after  you have  inserted 
the bottom object.   Size the top object so it cannot fit totally 
into the bottom object and thus be considered the bottom object's 
child.    Move the  top  object,  placing  its  upper left corner 
where  you want it inside the bottom object,  then size  the  top 
object down to the size  you  want. If you later decide to adjust  
the  position of the top object, you must restore it first to its 
previous  size.   Never  turn  off  the  Tree   Rearrange   alert  
when working with trees of this sort.



HINTS ON EXTENDING form_do

You can extend form_do to handle complex selector objects such as 
the  scrolling selectors in the RCS.   Use the upper byte of  the 
object   type  word  to  create extended  object   types.     The  
GEM  AES  ignores this byte;  the RCS ignores and  preserves  it.  
(Note:   You'll  have to do  this  with  RSCREATE.   Once  you've 
created  such  an  object,   put it into your library so you  can 
copy  it  easily.   You  can attempt this  modification  using  a 
debugger directly on the resource.  Use the .C file,  output from 
the  RCS,  to figure out the internal structure and make a backup 
before proceeding.)  Use TOUCHEXIT to return control from form_do 
as soon as the  user clicks  on  your  special  objects.    Write 
a  shell routine that processes the special  object,  redraws  as 
necessary,   and  re-enters  form_do.  Remember  to  restore  the 
resource to a known state at the end of your routine.

Use the user-defined object type to draw non-standard objects.

Make   use   of the Hidetree flag to make variable parts  of  the 
dialog appear and disappear.  Use  Hidetree  sparingly,  however,  
as  it  encourages  cumbersome dialogs and ill-structured  driver 
code.

To set up pointers to data areas, use the Indirect option.

Make   the most of your effort by putting your code and the  most 
general form of the associated subtree into libraries.



WHAT THE RCS v1.0 DOES NOT DO

The RCS does have certain limitations.  It can't do the following 
things:

   - handle free strings other than alerts

   - handle free bit images

   - create or edit user-defined objects or indirects

   - scroll the View window or Partbox contents
     
   - it cannot create a RSC file larger than 64K.  You may "hand-
     build" a RSC file larger than 64K and compile it in RSCREATE

   - In  the  current release there is a limitation in  that  you 
     cannot load DEF files produced in the 8088 world.  To create 
     a DEF file that will load you must use RSCREATE after moving 
     the resource file (RSC) over to the 68K environment 








                               End of Section 2




Section 3:



NOTES ON RSCREATE




FILES

The following files are included in this distribution:

RSCREATE.C      C source code for the mini-resource compiler.

RSRCLIB.H       Necessary to compile RSCREATE.C

RSCREATE.INP    Sample loading sequence for RSCREATE.

RSCREATE.BAT    The batch file for compiling RSCREATE.

EXAMPLE.C       Sample resource C file for use with RSCREATE.

EXAMPLE.RSC     The  Resource  Construction  Set  used  these  to 
                create EXAMPLE.C



SUMMARY OF OPERATION

NOTE:     Be  sure  to  read Section  3,  "Technical  Matter  for 
          Programmers,"   part  2  in   this   document,   before 
          proceeding with RSCREATE.






Execution

Insert  the filename into RSCREATE.C and execute RSCREATE.BAT  by 
typing  RSCREATE.  A binary resource file will be created in  the 
current  directory.  Remember  to  run  this file through RCS  at 
least once to resolve folded strings.



MODIFYING EXAMPLE.C

EXAMPLE.C  was  generated from a one-tree resource with at  least 
one  example  of each type of structure.  You should preserve the 
order of the structures within the file;  in particular the dummy 
image index rs_imdope MUST occur at the  end,  just  before   the  
filename.     If  you make additions to the structures,  do it at 
the  end  of  each array or you will have to  redo  any  affected 
pointers.   If  this practice causes data for different trees  to  
be intermixed,  compile and run RSCREATE,  then use the  Resource 
Construction Set to generate a new .C file.   It will reorder the 
data for you.



ADDING FREE STRINGS AND IMAGES

This  will  be  the  most common use of RSCREATE  for  those  who  
cannot  afford  the overhead  of  a  dummy  resource tree to hold 
these  strings/images.    Make  these  additions  early  in  your 
resource creation process if possible.

To add a free bitblk (image) you must do the following:

   1. Increment NUM_IMAGES.

   2. Add the new binary image, and add a pointer to  it  at  the  
      end  of rs_imdope.

   3. Increment NUM_BB.

   4. Add  the  new  bitblk  definition at the end of  rs_bitblk.  
      Its  data pointer must be a LONG index to the new rs_imdope 
      entry from above.

   5. Increment NUM_FRIMG.   Add an entry to rs_frimg, which must 
      be a LONG index to the new entry in rs_bitblk.

To add a new free string you must do the following:

   1. Increment NUM_STRINGS.

   2. Add the new string to rs_strings.

   3. Increment NUM_FRSTR.

   4. Add a LONG index to the new string in rs_frstr.

IMPORTANT  NOTE:   Always  put indices of non-alert free  strings 
before  those  of alert free strings in rs_frstr.   This is   the  
order  in  which  they  will  be emitted  by the output phase  of 
RCS (you can use RCS to reorder them,  in fact).  If you don't do 
this,  you  will  not be able to use RCS in LOCK mode  to  field-
modify the resource because it will change your order.



                               End of Section 3


             Part 3:  ADDITIONAL REFERENCE MATERIAL



INTRODUCTION

This  part  of "Introduction To GEM Programming" is  an  informal 
collection  of reference material that has been published by  the 
GEM  PROGRAMMER'S SUPPORT (GPS) program in a private area of  the 
DR FORUM on CompuServe (TM).   This information is being provided 
as  a  supplement  to  the documentation  to  help  you  in  your 
understanding  of GEM the implimentation of your own application.  
If  you choose to subscribe to the GPS program,  a large base  of 
additional information and sample code will be available for  you 
to include in your application.  

The  GEM Programer's Support engineers wish you GOOD LUCK in your 
programming endeavors!



Section 1:


UPDATED FUNCTIONALITY IN GEM 


WARNING  NOTICE:    If,  while  calling one of  these  additional      
     functions,  an Alert Box is displayed notifying you that GEM 
     has  received  a  "BAD FUNCTION #",  AND YOU ARE  PASSING  A 
     NUMBER DOCUMENTED AS VALID, then  you  are probably using an
     outdated  version of the system software.  If using an ATARI 
     machine,  contact ATARI directly for information on updating 
     to the most recent version of TOS.




GEM v1.2 ENHANCEMENTS 


Overview:

     VDI
	
          - VDI has added a SOUND function for playing tones  for 
          specified durations.



     AES

          - The overall performance has been improved  especially 
          in the event system ( evnt_msg,  evnt_multi) and in the 
          AES call overhead.

          - The  mouse form will automatically be converted  from 
          your application's mouse form to an arrow during a menu 
          drop-down, form fill-in, or critical error alert.  When 
          the alert is finished it will be converted back.

          - Pushing and holding down on the window control points 
          will   send  continous  WM_ARROWED  messages   to   the 
          application.  This allows the application to scroll his 
          window  as long as the user has the mouse  button  down 
          and the messages are being serviced.




SPECIFIC ENHANCEMENTS TO THE AES


appl_init()

	After a call to the appl_init() routine, the global array 
        will be set as follows:

	global[0]	0x0120	for version 1.20
	global[1]	0x0001  for one primary application supported
	global[2]	?	for your application id (probably 0)
	global[3]	0x1144	lo word of desktop surface's ob_spec
	global[4]	0x0000	hi word of ...
	global[5]	?	offset of tree base in resource
	global[6]	?	segment of ...
	global[7]	?	offset of resource memory alloc
	global[8]	?	segment of ...
	global[9]	?	length of resource memory alloc
	global[10]	?	number of planes of color (1-4)
	global[11]	?	offset of internal AES data structure
	global[12]	?	segment of ...
	global[13]	?	bit vector of desktop disk drives installed
					bit 15 ON means desktop has drive A
					bit 14 ON means desktop has drive B
					etc...
				not valid if application invoked from prompt
	global[14]	?	bit vector of desktop HARD disk drives
					bit 15 OFF means A: is floppy
					bit 14 OFF means B: is floppy
					bit 13 ON means C: is hard
					etc...
				not valid if application invoked from prompt



appl_find()

	Desk   accessories   no   longer   have   to   be   named 
        DESK(1,2,3).ACC  in order to be loaded.   Now,  the first 
        three  *.ACC  files  found in the \AUTO directory will be 
        loaded  as desk accessories,  so long as memory  permits.  
        The  space-padded,  8  character filename of  these  desk 
        accessories   are   what  is  searched  for   using   the 
        appl_find() routine.



appl_play()

	- A   bug  was  fixed  that  prevented  recordings  which 
        contained SHIFT clicks from being properly played back.



evnt_mesag()

        - Message handling was optimized for the common condition	
        of reading a 16 byte message.

        - A  new standard message format has been  developed  for 
        application-defined  messages  that contain  an  address.  
        This  is so that in future protected-memory environments, 
        the  system  will be able to copy out  the  "pointed  to" 
        memory  area  from the sender'sapplication space  to  the 
        receiver's.   This  copying  is not performed  today  for 
        space considerations.  The new format is as follows:

  		word[0]	- message identifier
		word[1]	- sender's application id
		word[2]	- 0xFFFF (to flag as containing pointer)
		word[3] - length of memory buffer pointed at
 		word[4] - offset of memory buffer
		word[5]	- segment of memory buffer
		word[6]	- application specific
		word[7]	- application specific

	The  range of message identifiers that should be used  by 
        applications   is   1024-32000.    By  first   doing   an 
        appl_find()  and  verifying  the  sender's  identity,  we 
        should  be  able  to  avoid  message  collision  amoungst 
        various ISV's.



evnt_multi()

	This  function has been optimized for  performance,  such 
        that  the  following  types of  events  are  signifcantly 
        faster in turn-around time:

	  - keybd waits when you have a keystroke waiting

	  - mouse waits when the condition is already TRUE

	  - button waits when the condition is already TRUE

	  - timer waits of 0x0L milli-seconds

          - Dispatching to another ready to run application  will 
          only  occur every 10th AES call instead of every single 
          AES  call,  this  significantly  improves  evnt_multi() 
          throughput for the currently running  application.   As 
          usual, if an application makes a call that blocks, then 
          a dispatch will occur immediately.

	  - A  bug was fixed that allowed mouse and button events 
          to be satisfied when your application's window was  not 
          on top.

          - A  bug  was fixed in the timer delay code that  could 
          have caused the system to behave incorrectly in certain 
          race conditions.



form_alert()

	- The  spacing within an alert was reduced  to  guarantee 
        that  even  a  worst case alert (icons,  5  long  message 
        lines,  3  buttons) would not take up more than a 1/4  of 
        the screen.  In Version1.1, with certain alerts that were 
        larger than 1/4 of the screen, the system would crash.



form_do()

	- The  source  to  form_do()  is provided  to  allow  for 
        simpler  application tailoring of the  AES's  generalized 
        form fill-in capability.   This source code refers to two 
        new calls:

		form_keybd()

		form_button()


     NOTE:  Use this code only if the normal form_do code doesn't suit 
            your needs.  (AND AT YOUR OWN RISK)



        form_do() is as follows:


	WORD
find_obj(tree, start_obj, which)       /* routine to find the next editable */
	REG LONG	tree;          /* text field, or a field that is as */
	WORD		start_obj;     /* marked as a default return field. */
	WORD		which;
{
	REG WORD	obj, flag, theflag, inc;

	obj = 0;
	flag = EDITABLE;
	inc = 1;
	switch(which)
	{
	  case FMD_BACKWARD:
		inc = -1;
						/* fall thru		*/
	  case FMD_FORWARD:
		obj = start_obj + inc;
		break;
	  case FMD_DEFLT:
		flag = DEFAULT;
		break;
	}

	while ( obj >= 0 )
	{
	  theflag = LWGET(OB_FLAGS(obj));
	  if (theflag & flag)
	    return(obj);
	  if (theflag & LASTOB)
	    obj = -1;
	  else
	    obj += inc;
	}
	return(start_obj);
}


	WORD
fm_inifld(tree, start_fld)
	LONG		tree;
	WORD		start_fld;
{
						/* position cursor on	*/
						/*   the starting field	*/
	if (start_fld == 0)
	  start_fld = find_obj(tree, 0, FMD_FORWARD);
	return( start_fld );
}


	WORD
form_do(tree, start_fld)
	REG LONG	tree;
	WORD		start_fld;
{
	REG WORD	edit_obj;
	WORD		next_obj;
	WORD		which, cont;
	WORD		idx;
	WORD		mx, my, mb, ks, kr, br;

	wind_update(1);
	wind_update(3);
						/* set starting field	*/
						/*   to edit, if want	*/
						/*   first editing field*/
						/*   then walk tree	*/
	next_obj = fm_inifld(tree, start_fld);
	edit_obj = 0;
						/* interact with user	*/
	cont = TRUE;
	while(cont)
	{
						/* position cursor on	*/
						/*   the selected 	*/
						/*   editting field	*/
	  if ( (next_obj != 0) &&
	       (edit_obj != next_obj) )
	  {
	    edit_obj = next_obj;
	    next_obj = 0;
	    objc_edit(tree, edit_obj, 0, &idx, EDINIT);
	  }
						/* wait for mouse or key */
	  which = evnt_multi(MU_KEYBD | MU_BUTTON, 
			0x02, 0x01, 0x01, 
			0, 0, 0, 0, 0,
			0, 0, 0, 0, 0,
			0x0L,
			0, 0,
			&mx, &my, &mb, &ks, &kr, &br);
						/* handle keyboard event*/
	  if (which & MU_KEYBD)
	  {
	    cont = form_keybd(tree, edit_obj, next_obj, kr, &next_obj, &kr);
	    if (kr)
	      objc_edit(tree, edit_obj, kr, &idx, EDCHAR);
	  }
						/* handle button event	*/
	  if (which & MU_BUTTON)
	  {
	    next_obj = objc_find(tree, ROOT, MAX_DEPTH, mx, my);
 	    if (next_obj == NIL)
	    {
	      /* sound(TRUE, 440, 2); */
	      next_obj = 0;
	    }
	    else
	      cont = form_button(tree, next_obj, br, &next_obj);
	  }
						/* handle end of field	*/
						/*   clean up		*/
	  if ( (!cont) ||
	       ((next_obj != 0) && 
		(next_obj != edit_obj)) )

	  {
	    objc_edit(tree, edit_obj, 0, &idx, EDEND);
	  }
	}

	wind_update(2);
	wind_update(0);
						/* return exit object	*/
						/*   hi bit may be set	*/
						/*   if exit obj. was	*/
						/*   double-clicked	*/
	return(next_obj);
}



NOTE:   This is the end of the source code for form_do.  Remember 
        this  code  was provided for you to use or modify in  the 
        writing  of your own code to perform  similar  functions.  
        BEWARE, check your code carefully.

	By   choosing   different   evnt_multi()   condtions   an 
        application-defined form_do() can wait for a time out, be 
        used  in a window or other conditions where messages need 
        to still be active, can support forms with hot spots, and 
        do more specialized validation or keyboard control.



form_keybd()

/* define FM_OCHAR int_out[2]*/	/* value of character after initial    */
				/*  processing                         */                 
				/*  if TAB, BACKTAB, UP, DOWN,         */
				/*  LEFT, RIGHT, and RETURN then it    */
				/*  will be a 0, indicating no further */
				/*  processing is needed               */

	WORD
form_keybd(form, obj, nxt_obj, thechar, pnxt_obj, pchar)
	LONG		form;
	WORD		obj;
	WORD		nxt_obj;
	WORD		thechar;
	WORD		*pnxt_obj;
	WORD		*pchar;
{
	FM_FORM = form;
	FM_OBJ = obj;
	FM_INXTOB = nxt_obj;
	FM_ICHAR = thechar;
	gem_if( FORM_KEYBD );
	*pnxt_obj = FM_ONXTOB;
	*pchar = FM_OCHAR;
	return( (WORD) RET_CODE );
}

form_button()
                                   

	WORD                       
form_button(form, obj, clks, pnxt_obj)
	LONG		form;      
	WORD		obj;       
	WORD		clks;   
	WORD		*pnxt_obj;
{
	FM_FORM = form;
	FM_OBJ = obj;
	FM_CLKS = clks;
	gem_if( FORM_BUTTON );
	*pnxt_obj = FM_ONXTOB;
	return( (WORD) RET_CODE );
}



fsel_input()

	- A  bug was fixed that caused an extra long filename  at 
        the  end  of the directory specification to screw up  the 
        file selector display

	- The file selector now supports a directory with several 
        comma-separated, wildcard specifications, such as:

		A:\*.TXT,*.DOC,*.BAK
		C:\PICTURES\*.IMG,*.GEM



menu_ienable()

	- A  special calling convention has been established  for 
        and  disabling menu titles.   If the item number the high 
        bit set,  then it will be enabled/disabled and the result 
        will  be drawn on the screen.   This only works for  menu 
        titles  since they are guarenteed to be displayed on  the 
        screen.

	- This  function has also been optimized for  the  normal 
        case  of  enabling and disabling menu sub-items that  are 
        not visible.



menu_register()

	- Six  additional desk accessory menu slots  were  added, 
        bringing  the  total  to 12 slots.   The number  of  desk 
        accessory  processes  is still limited to  3,  so  anyone 
        implementing  a set of desk accessories should  group  as 
        many  desk  accessory menu items/functions into a  single 
        desk accessory file as possible.

        - Desk accessories can have menus!  Only one per process.  
        The menu bar is automatically changed whenever one of the 
        desk accessory's windows is brought to the top.

        - Desk Accessories should top their windows when they get 
        an AC_OPEN message if they are already opened, but not on 
        top.

        - A Print Spooler desk accessory menu item has been added 
        to CALCLOCK.ACC.  This print spooler spools a file out to 
        the printer in BACKGROUND!!!  Any application can send it 
        a special message that specifies the file to  spool,  the 
        number  of copies,  and whether or not to delete the file 
        when finished spooling.  Do an appl_find() for "CALCLOCK" 
        to  get the ap_id of the print spooler.   The  format  of 
        this message is as follows:

  		word[0]	- 100
		word[1]	- (sender's ap_id )
		word[2] - 0xFFFF
		word[3]	- length of file specification
 		word[4]	- offset to file specification
		word[5]	- segment of ...
		word[6] - number of copies to spool
		word[7]	- 0 ==> don't delete file when finished
			  1 ==> delete file when finished

	Once  the  message has been received by the  spooler,  an 
        acknowledge   message  is  sent  back  to   the   sending 
        application.   This  allows  the  sender to free  up  the 
        string  space pointed at in the message.   The format  of 
        this message is as follows:

  		word[0]	- 101
		word[1]	- (print spooler's ap_id)
		word[2]	- 0
		word[3]	- 0
 		word[4]	- 0
		word[5]	- 0
		word[6]	- 0
		word[7]	- 0



objc_draw()

	- All  system text drawn by the AES will be moved to  the 
        nearest   byte  boundary  to  improve  performance  after 
        justification  has been performed.   This will only  take 
        place  when there is a minimum of 16 pixels  between  the 
        text string extent and its bounding object's extent.

                                                       

objc_edit

          This is the binding for the OBJC_EDIT routine.  
          It  doesn't appear to match the binding in the 
          manual  because this has 5 parameters and  the 
          manual binding has 6.   The reason for this is 
          that  the  variable "idx" serves as  both  the 
          "ob_edidx"   and   "ob_ednewidx"   that    are 
          described in the manual.   As you can see from 
          the  code,  prior  to the call the value  that 
          "*idx"  points at is stored in the  "ob_edidx" 
          variable (OB_IDX).   After the call, the value 
          returned   in   the   "ob_ednewidx"   variable 
          (OB_ODX) is written into the location  pointed 
          at by "*idx".



	WORD
objc_edit(tree, obj, inchar, idx, kind)
	LONG		tree;
	WORD		obj;
	WORD		inchar, *idx, kind;
{
	OB_TREE = tree;
	OB_OBJ = obj;
	OB_CHAR = inchar;
	OB_IDX = *idx;
	OB_KIND = kind;
	gem_if( OBJC_EDIT );
	*idx = OB_ODX;
	return((WORD) RET_CODE );
}



wind_create()

	- A  bug  was fixed that caused windows with scroll  bars 
        but  not sizer to be drawn without a white square in  the 
        sizer position.

	- Make sure your application supports the condition  when 
        there  are no windows available.   This is important  for 
        when   multiple  applications  will  share  the   desktop 
        together.   It can be tested now by renaming DESK1.ACC to 
        DESK2.ACC to DESK3.ACC and running your application.  The 
        DESK   menu  will  have  several  duplicated  clock   and 
        calculator items.  Open all of these and then try to open 
        your applications window.  Your application should put up 
        an alert, suggesting that the user close some windows and
	try again.



wind_set()

	- When  setting slider position and size,  if the  change 
        does not require a redraw, none will be issued.











SPECIFIC ENHANCEMENTS TO THE VDI



Escape 61: Generate	This escape generates a tone at a specified              
                Tone		frequency for a specified time interval.   
                                                                           
        			Tone generation may be suppressed by muting
        			tone generation using Escape function 62.  
_____________________________________________________________________      
                                                                           
Input:	contrl(0) -- Opcode = 5                                            
        	contrl(1) -- Number of input vertices = 0                  
        	contrl(3) -- Length of intin array = 2                     
        	contrl(5) -- Function id = 61                              
        	contrl(6) -- Device handle                                 
                                                                           
        	intin(0)  -- Frequency in Hertz of the tone to generate    
        	intin(1)  -- Duration of tone specified in timer ticks     
        		     (for the IBM PC there are 18.2 ticks/sec).    
                                                                           
Output:	contrl(2) -- Number of output vertices = 0                         
        	contrl(4) -- Length of intout array = 0                    
                                                                           
_________________________________________________________________________  
                                                                           
C BINDING                                                                  
                                                                           
Procedure Name	v_sound(handle, frequency, duration)                       
                                                                           
Data Types		WORD v_sound();                                    
			WORD handle;                                       
        		WORD frequency;                                    
        		WORD duration;                                     
                                                                           
Input Arguments	handle = contrl[6]                                         
			frequency = intin[0]                               
        		duration = intin[1]                                
                                                                           
                                                                           
                                                                           
                                                                           
                                                                           
                                                                           
                                                                           
Escape 62: Set/Clear    This escape allows tone generation to be           
           Muting Flag  Enabled or Disabled by setting or clearing         
           		     the muting flag, or allows inquiry on the     
        		     present state of the muting flag.             
_________________________________________________________________________  
Input:	contrl(0) -- Opcode = 5                                            
        	contrl(1) -- Number of input vertices = 0                  
        	contrl(3) -- Length of intin array = 1                     
        	contrl(5) -- Function id = 62                              
        	contrl(6) -- Device handle                                 
                                                                           
        	intin(0)  -- Action:                                       
        			-1 - Inquire state of muting flag          
        			 0 - Allow tone generation                 
        		         1 - Mute tone generation                  
                                                                           
Output:	contrl(2) -- Number of output vertices = 0                         
        	contrl(4) -- Length of intout array                        
        		     0 for set muting flag operations              
        		     1 for inquire state                           
                                                                           
        	intout(0) -- For inquiry calls, the present state of       
        		     the muting flag                               
        		     0 - Tone generation is allowed                
        		     non-zero - Tone generation is muted           
                                                                           
_________________________________________________________________________  
                                                                           
C BINDING                                                                  
                                                                           
Procedure Name	    status = vs_mute(handle, action)                       
                                                                           
Data Types		    WORD vs_mute();                                
			    WORD handle;                                   
        		    WORD action;                                   
                                                                           
Input Arguments	    handle = contrl[6]                                     
			    action = intin[0]                              
                                                                          
Output Arguments    status = intout[0] (status is undefined if setting     
				        or clearing the muting flag)       


                        End of Section 1





Section 2:


Notes on obj_offset
     by Tim Oren  
     11/04/85

Jim N.  has asked me to write a few words regarding the  problems 
people are having with objc_offset.   First, at this time neither 
Jim  nor  I have been able to isolate ANY error  which  indicates 
failure within the AES.   The most common problem is supplying an 
incorrect  object number to the routine.   This has happened as a 
result of:

     1) Using a TREE name instead of a object name  in  the call,  
     2) Using the wrong object name or 
     3) blowing it some other way.   

Let me explain the type of symptoms you will see if you make this 
kind  of error.   First,  you could get lucky.   The  number  you 
supply  may be wrong,  but within the legal range of objects  for 
the tree.   In this case,  you just get the wrong rectangle - and 
presumably  fix  it.   Secondly,  (and  this is what  causes  the 
problems)  you  may give objc_offset an object  number  which  is 
greater than the number defined in the tree.  This will cause the 
AES to overindex the tree, and attempt to interpret the following
area of memory as objects.

If there are no following trees in the resource, it will probably 
read in part of the tree index, try to interpret it as an object, 
and  go straight into the bag following links  to  nowhere.   You 
will end up rebooting or doing a cold restart.

If  there are trees following the one you over-indexed,  you will 
get  an object,  BUT the pointers in it will be relative  to  the 
WRONG tree.   Depending on how lucky you are,  the system may end 
up in a tight loop (see above),  or the operation may return with 
a  ridiculously large x,y value.   Needless to say,  when you use 
that overrange x,y in an AES or VDI call, you are in big trouble.

So,  the  moral  of  the story is:  If you suspect  trouble  with 
objc_offset, be SURE you are pointing at the correct object.  The 
sanity you save may be your own! 


More:

The  most common usages of objc_offset,  and how to do them  (and 
how NOT):


When getting the offset of the root of a tree:

     rsrc_gaddr(R_TREE, MYTREE, &tree);
     objc_offset(tree, ROOT, &x, &y); 

DON'T use the name of the tree instead of ROOT!   Also,  remember 
that the root x,y of a dialog is undefined until you have  called 
form_center on the dialog.


When getting the offset of a menu title item:

     rsrc_gaddr(R_TREE, MYMENU, &menu_tree);
     objc_offset(menu_tree, TITLEOBJ, &x, &y); 

DON'T use the address of a dialog tree instead of the  menu_tree. 
DON'T use the name of the menu tree,  dialog tree, or some dialog 
object instead of the TITLEOBJ.  (Note: this operation is usually 
done to define the "zoom box" going to a dialog.) 


                        End of Section 2






Section 3:


Beneath the Menu Tree
     (Technical Notes on Internal and External Formats)
     by Tim Oren


Introduction

There  are  two  illustrations that  accompany  this  file.  They 
contain  the  figures  referred to in  the  text  below.They  are 
distributed  with  the Technical Support Information Packet  that 
came with the GEM DOS 68K Developer Kit.  They are also available 
as GEM files in the DR FORUM on CompuServe.
 

Menu structure - Linkage

The  standard  menu tree structure is shown  in  Figure  1.   The 
"skeleton"  nodes labelled ROOT,  THE SCREEN,  THE BAR,  and  THE 
ACTIVE  must be included.   The subtrees below THE ACTIVE and THE 
SCREEN  are parallel structures,  the former containing the  menu 
bar  entries,  and the latter the drop-down  definitions.   These 
sub-trees are also in one-to-one correspondence,  i.e., the first 
bar  entry in the subtree goes with the first drop-down entry  in 
the other subtree, and so on.  (Obviously, there must be the same 
number of each.)  The initial DESK bar entry and drop-down with 8 
entries  are REQUIRED as a location for desk accessory titles  to 
be shown at run-time. 

The bar entries are usuallly objects of type G_TITLE,  the  drop-
downs  are always of type G_BOX.   The subtree of each  drop-down 
defines  the  entries  appearing within  the  box;  usually  this 
structure  is  "flat" and composed of G_STRING objects,  but  see 
below for exceptions.

The  best  way to gain a feel for this structure is to  create  a 
"blank" menu using the Resource Construction Set,  generate a  .C 
file  of the resource,  and examine the linkage within the  tree.  
The  "blank"  menu  will  contain all of  the  required  objects, 
including  the DESK bar entry and drop-down.   Remember that  the 
RCS always outputs trees in pre-order.  If you hand-modify a menu 
tree,  you should preserve the pre-order,  or run it through  the 
RCS to perform a conversion.

Note  that  changing a menu's internal structure "on the fly"  at 
run-time  is  not recommended.   If you feel you  must  use  this 
technique,   be   sure   to  maintain  the  linkage  and   screen 
requirements given in this document,  and surround the  modifying 
code  with menu_bar calls to erase and redisplay the menu.   This 
will  guarantee compatibility with future multi-tasking  versions 
of GEM which may copy menu trees to a system buffer.


Menu Structure - Screen Ownership

Like  all  object trees,  menus must follow the rules  of  visual 
hierarchy.  Figure 2 shows the standard rectangle organization of 
menus.  The ROOT object of the menu extends throughout the entire 
screen.  The X size of the ROOT must be 80.  THE BAR includes the 
top-most  line of the display for its entire width.   THE  SCREEN 
comprises the remainder of the display,  in which the  drop-downs 
will  appear.   THE  ACTIVE is that portion of THE BAR  which  is 
covered by menu bar entries.

Due  to  details  of the GEM  object  drawing  routines,  certain 
empirical  object sizing rules must be followed in order that the 
menu bar be drawn correctly at run-time.  These are: 

      1 THE  BAR  must  have a height of one character  plus  two 
        pixels (coded as 0x201 in the OB_HEIGHT field).   Its X,Y 
        displacement is 0,0.

      2 The height of THE ACTIVE must be precisely one  character 
        plus   three  pixels.    Its  X,Y  displacement  is   2,0 
        (characters).

      3 The  menu  bar  entries must also have a  height  of  one 
        character plus three pixels,  with a zero Y displacement.  
        They  must  completely  cover  THE ACTIVE  area  with  no 
        overlaps.

      4 THE  SCREEN  must have a Y displacement  of  exactly  one 
        character plus three pixels.

      5 The entries within each drop-down should completely cover 
        it.   Overlaps MAY occur.   (If you fail to do this,  the 
        entire  drop-down  will invert when the cursor touches  a 
        non-covered  area.)   Each drop-down has a  Y  offset  of 
        zero,   and  an  X  offset  which  places  it  under  the 
        corresponding  bar  entry (this will be the  bar  entry's 
        offset PLUS TWO, because THE ACTIVE is itself offset).	

Again,  the  best reference for these rules is a C source  of  an 
existing menu tree.  



Summary of menu run-time

The application is responsible for declaring its menu to GEM with 
a  menu-bar call.  At this time GEM will adjust the X size of the 
ROOT,  THE  BAR,  and THE SCREEN if the display is other than  80 
characters wide.  The desk accessory titles are also installed in 
the DESK drop-down at this time.  DESK entries which are unneeded 
are unlinked.   A menu action begins when the GEM screen  manager 
detects a movement of the mouse into the area of THE ACTIVE.  GEM 
determines which bar entry was touched, inverts it, and draws the 
corresponding  drop-down  after  bltting  away  the  screen  area 
beneath.   GEM  then waits for the mouse to exit the bar  entry's 
rectangle.   If  the  user moves the mouse to another bar  entry, 
then the old entry is reinverted,  its drop-down is replaced with 
the bltted screen contents,  and the new entry and drop-down  are 
processed as above.   If the mouse moves off THE ACTIVE, then its 
button state is recorded.

If  the  mouse moves into THE SCREEN or onto non-active parts  of 
THE BAR, then GEM just waits for it to re-enter the THE ACTIVE or 
the drop-down.  

Whenever  the  mouse  enters the active  drop-down  GEM  does  an 
objc_find on the subtree of that drop-down.   Whichever object is 
found is inverted (if it is not disabled),  and GEM waits for the 
mouse  to exit that object's rectangle (when this entire sequence 
is repeated),  or for the mouse button to toggle, which generates 
a menu-event message and terminates the menu sequence.  Note that 
the two parameters returned with a menu-event refer to the object 
number of the selected menu bar object,  and the object number of 
the selected object within the drop-down.

Figure 3 is a schematic of GEM's mouse/menu handling.



Making fancy menus  (The School of French Cooking)

Most  unusual  menus  are created with  a  combination  of  three 
techniques: Using non-text objects in the bar or pull-down, using
user-defined objects in the drop-down,  and violating the  visual 
hierarchy rules in the drop-down.   Each of these methods will be 
discussed in turn, followed by an example of their usage.

You may use bar entry objects which are not typed G_TITLE so long 
as  you keep all of THE ACTIVE covered with bar entry rectangles.  
There  are two reasons for caution.  First,  the G_TITLE type  is 
highly  optimized  for drawing speed.   Use of other  types  will 
inevitably  degrade GEM's response to mouse motions in  the  bar.  
Second,  the  G_TITLE type and the empirical bar formatting rules 
given  above guarantee that the lines at the bottom of  the  menu 
bar  will  be redraw automatically when the drop-down is  "pulled 
up".   You  will have to experiment to obtain equivalent  results 
with any other object type.

You may use non-string objects in a drop-down if you are  willing 
to accept slower drawing.  Be sure to keep all parts of the drop-
down  box  covered.   Remember  that some objects  (such  as  bit 
images)  may look odd when inverted by themselves.   In this case 
you may wish to employ non-standard hierarchy as explained  below 
in order to improve the appearence of your menu.

User defined objects may be used in drop-downs.  Since these must 
be linked to drawing code at run-time, you should insert a place-
holder  box object which will be modified by your  initialization 
routines.  Your drawing code will be called by GEM when the drop-
down  is first drawn,  and again when the object changes state as 
the mouse moves.   This lets you create unique selection  effects 
such  as outlines or check-marks.   We strongly suggest that  you 
avoid  user-defined  objects  in  the  menu  bar:   they  degrade 
performance unacceptably.

Non-standard visual hierarchy is useful in the drop-downs because 
the  standard objc_draw and objc_find routines are used by GEM to 
show and find objects within the box.  This means that the  trick 
of  overdrawing  an  object with a later sibling (which  will  be 
found by objc_find) will work here as well as in dialogs. 

Figure 4 shows a sample drop-down which one might wish to  create 
as  part  of a game program.   Bit images are used to  supplement 
text  as  a cue to non-reading users.   It is  desired  that  the 
entire area containing image and text be inverted by GEM when the 
mouse  points  at  either.   The effect is achieved (in  RCS)  by 
placing the text and images into the drop-down box  first.   They 
are  then covered over with G_IBOX objects with extents equal  to 
the  dashed boxes.   Since G_IBOXs are transparent,  the text and 
images show through.   Because the boxes were placed  last,  they 
follow the text and image objects in the tree,  and will be found 
and  inverted by GEM at run-time.   Since the other objects  show 
through, they get inverted also!  (NB: NEVER use RCS to SORT this 
type of drop-down once it has been created!)


                        End of Section 3


